<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Third Edition, Vol. 9 of 12)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>May 7, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">42661</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="zh"></language>
      <language id="ja"></language>
      <language id="ro"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
      <language id="sv"></language>
      <language id="no"></language>
      <language id="nl"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="gd"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2013-05-07">May 7, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Magic and Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Social Anthropology in the University of Liverpool</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. IX. of XII.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Part VI: The Scapegoat.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1913</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
With <hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi> our general discussion of the theory
and practice of the Dying God is brought to a conclusion.
The aspect of the subject with which we are here chiefly
concerned is the use of the Dying God as a scapegoat to free
his worshippers from the troubles of all sorts with which
life on earth is beset. I have sought to trace this curious
usage to its origin, to decompose the idea of the Divine
Scapegoat into the elements out of which it appears to be
compounded. If I am right, the idea resolves itself into a
simple confusion between the material and the immaterial,
between the real possibility of transferring a physical load
to other shoulders and the supposed possibility of transferring
our bodily and mental ailments to another who will
bear them for us. When we survey the history of this
pathetic fallacy from its crude inception in savagery to its
full development in the speculative theology of civilized
nations, we cannot but wonder at the singular power which
the human mind possesses of transmuting the leaden dross
of superstition into a glittering semblance of gold. Certainly
in nothing is this alchemy of thought more conspicuous
than in the process which has refined the base and
foolish custom of the scapegoat into the sublime conception
of a God who dies to take away the sins of the world.
</p>

<p>
Along with the discussion of the Scapegoat I have
included in this volume an account of the remarkable religious
ritual of the Aztecs, in which the theory of the
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
Dying God found its most systematic and most tragic
expression. There is nothing, so far as I am aware, to
shew that the men and women, who in Mexico died cruel
deaths in the character of gods and goddesses, were regarded
as scapegoats by their worshippers and executioners; the
intention of slaying them seems rather to have been to
reinforce by a river of human blood the tide of life which
might else grow stagnant and stale in the veins of the
deities. Hence the Aztec ritual, which prescribed the
slaughter, the roasting alive, and the flaying of men and
women in order that the gods might remain for ever young
and strong, conforms to the general theory of deicide which
I have offered in this work. On that theory death is a
portal through which gods and men alike must pass to
escape the decrepitude of age and to attain the vigour of
eternal youth. The conception may be said to culminate
in the Brahmanical doctrine that in the daily sacrifice the
body of the Creator is broken anew for the salvation of the
world.
</p>

<p>
J. G. Frazer.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cambridge</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>21st June, 1913</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Transference of Evil.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Transference to Inanimate Objects.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Transference to Inanimate Objects.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
principle
of vicarious
suffering.</note>
In the preceding parts of this work we have traced the
practice of killing a god among peoples in the hunting,
pastoral, and agricultural stages of society; and I have
attempted to explain the motives which led men to adopt
so curious a custom. One aspect of the custom still
remains to be noticed. The accumulated misfortunes and
sins of the whole people are sometimes laid upon the dying
god, who is supposed to bear them away for ever, leaving
the people innocent and happy. The notion that we can
transfer our guilt and sufferings to some other being who
will bear them for us is familiar to the savage mind. It
arises from a very obvious confusion between the physical
and the mental, between the material and the immaterial.
Because it is possible to shift a load of wood, stones, or
what not, from our own back to the back of another, the
savage fancies that it is equally possible to shift the burden
of his pains and sorrows to another, who will suffer them in
his stead. Upon this idea he acts, and the result is an
endless number of very unamiable devices for palming off
upon some one else the trouble which a man shrinks from
bearing himself. In short, the principle of vicarious suffering
is commonly understood and practised by races who
stand on a low level of social and intellectual culture. In
the following pages I shall illustrate the theory and the
practice as they are found among savages in all their naked
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
simplicity, undisguised by the refinements of metaphysics
and the subtleties of theology.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of evil
to things. Evils swept
away by
rivers.</note>
The devices to which the cunning and selfish savage
resorts for the sake of easing himself at the expense of his
neighbour are manifold; only a few typical examples out of
a multitude can be cited. At the outset it is to be observed
that the evil of which a man seeks to rid himself need not
be transferred to a person; it may equally well be transferred
to an animal or a thing, though in the last case the
thing is often only a vehicle to convey the trouble to the
first person who touches it. In some of the East Indian
islands they think that epilepsy can be cured by striking
the patient on the face with the leaves of certain trees and
then throwing them away. The disease is believed to have
passed into the leaves, and to have been thrown away with
them.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), pp. 266
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 305, 357 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp.
141, 340.</note> In the Warramunga and Tjingilli tribes of Central
Australia men who suffered from headache have often been
seen wearing women's head-rings. <q>This was connected
with the belief that the pain in the head would pass into
the rings, and that then it could be thrown away with them
into the bush, and so got rid of effectually. The natives
have a very firm belief in the efficacy of this treatment. In
the same way when a man suffers from internal pain, usually
brought on by overeating, his wife's head-rings are placed
on his stomach; the evil magic which is causing all the
trouble passes into them, and they are then thrown away
into the bushes, where the magic is supposed to leave them.
After a time they are searched for by the woman, who
brings them back, and again wears them in the ordinary
way.</q><note place='foot'>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>The Northern Tribes of Central
Australia</hi> (London, 1904), p. 474.</note> Among the Sihanaka of Madagascar, when a man
is very sick, his relatives are sometimes bidden by the
diviner to cast out the evil by means of a variety of things,
such as a stick of a particular sort of tree, a rag, a pinch of
earth from an ant's nest, a little money, or what not. Whatever
they may be, they are brought to the patient's house
and held by a man near the door, while an exorcist stands
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
in the house and pronounces the formula necessary for casting
out the disease. When he has done, the things are
thrown away in a southward direction, and all the people in
the house, including the sick man, if he has strength enough,
shake their loose robes and spit towards the door in order
to expedite the departure of the malady.<note place='foot'>J. Pearse, <q>Customs connected
with Death and Burial among the
Sihanaka,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Antananarivo Annual
and Madagascar Magazine</hi>, vol. ii.,
<hi rend='italic'>Reprint of the Second four Numbers</hi>
(Antananarivo, 1896), pp. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When an Atkhan
of the Aleutian Islands had committed a grave sin and
desired to unburden himself of his guilt, he proceeded as
follows. Having chosen a time when the sun was clear and
unclouded, he picked up certain weeds and carried them
about his person. Then he laid them down, and calling
the sun to witness, cast his sins upon them, after which,
having eased his heart of all that weighed upon it, he threw
the weeds into the fire, and fancied that thus he cleansed
himself of his guilt.<note place='foot'>Ivan Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the Population,
Industries, and Resources of
Alaska</hi>, p. 158.</note> In Vedic times a younger brother
who married before his elder brother was thought to have
sinned in so doing, but there was a ceremony by which he
could purge himself of his sin. Fetters of reed-grass were
laid on him in token of his guilt, and when they had been
washed and sprinkled they were flung into a foaming torrent,
which swept them away, while the evil was bidden to vanish
with the foam of the stream.<note place='foot'>H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des
Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p. 322.</note> The Matse negroes of Togoland
think that the river Awo has power to carry away the
sorrows of mankind. So when one of their friends has died,
and their hearts are heavy, they go to the river with leaves
of the raphia palm tied round their necks and drums in
their hands. Standing on the bank they beat the drums
and cast the leaves into the stream. As the leaves float
away out of sight to the sound of the rippling water and
the roll of the drums, they fancy that their sorrow too is
lifted from them.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin,
1906), p. 800.</note> Similarly, the ancient Greeks imagined
that the pangs of love might be healed by bathing in
the river Selemnus.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, vii. 23. 3.</note> The Indians of Peru sought to
purify themselves from their sins by plunging their heads
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
in a river; they said that the river washed their sins
away.<note place='foot'>P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de
la Idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621),
p. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of evil
to things.</note>
An Arab cure for melancholy or madness caused by love
is to put a dish of water on the sufferer's head, drop melted
lead into it, and then bury the lead in an open field; thus
the mischief that was in the man goes away.<note place='foot'>This I learned from my friend W.
Robertson Smith, who mentioned as
his authority David of Antioch, <hi rend='italic'>Tazyin</hi>,
in the story <q>Orwa.</q></note> Amongst the
Miotse of China, when the eldest son of the house attains
the age of seven years, a ceremony called <q>driving away the
devil</q> takes place. The father makes a kite of straw and
lets it fly away in the desert, bearing away all evil with it.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallele
und Vergleiche</hi> (Stuttgart, 1878),
pp. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
When an Indian of Santiago Tepehuacan is ill, he will
sometimes attempt to rid himself of the malady by baking
thrice seven cakes; of these he places seven in the top of
the highest pine-tree of the forest, seven he lays at the foot
of the tree, and seven he casts into a well, with the water of
which he then washes himself. By this means he transfers
the sickness to the water of the well and so is made whole.<note place='foot'><q>Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan
à son évêque sur les mœurs
et coutumes des Indiens soumis à ses
soins,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), Deuxième Série, ii.
(1834) p. 182.</note>
The Baganda believed that plague was caused by the god
Kaumpuli, who resided in a deep hole in his temple. To
prevent him from escaping and devastating the country, they
battened him down in the hole by covering the top with
plantain-stems and piling wild-cat-skins over them; there
was nothing like wild-cat-skins to keep him down, so
hundreds of wild cats were hunted and killed every year
to supply the necessary skins. However, sometimes in spite
of these precautions the god contrived to escape, and then
the people died. When a garden or house was plague-stricken,
the priests purified it by transferring the disease to
a plantain-tree and then carrying away the tree to a piece
of waste land. The way in which they effected the transference
of the disease was this. They first made a number
of little shields and spears out of plantain fibre and reeds
and placed them at intervals along the path leading from
the garden to the main road. A young plantain-tree, about
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
to bear fruit, was then cut down, the stem was laid in the
path leading to one of the plague-stricken huts, and it was
speared with not less than twenty reed spears, which were
left sticking in it, while some of the plantain-fibre shields
were also fastened to it. This tree was then carried down
the path to the waste land and left there. It went by the
name of the Scapegoat (<foreign rend='italic'>kyonzire</foreign>). To make quite sure that the
plague, after being thus deposited in the wilderness, should
not return by the way it went, the priests raised an arch,
covered with barkcloth, over the path at the point where it
diverged from the main road. This arch was thought to interpose
an insurmountable barrier to the return of the plague.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dyak
transference
of evil
to things.</note>
Dyak priestesses expel ill-luck from a house by hewing
and slashing the air in every corner of it with wooden
swords, which they afterwards wash in the river, to let the
ill-luck float away down stream. Sometimes they sweep
misfortune out of the house with brooms made of the
leaves of certain plants and sprinkled with rice-water and
blood. Having swept it clean out of every room and into
a toy-house made of bamboo, they set the little house with
its load of bad luck adrift on the river. The current carries
it away out to sea, where it shifts its baleful cargo to a
certain kettle-shaped ship, which floats in mid-ocean and
receives in its capacious hold all the ills that flesh is heir
to. Well would it be with mankind if the evils remained
for ever tossing far away on the billows; but, alas, they are
dispersed from the ship to the four winds, and settle again,
and yet again, on the weary Dyak world. On Dyak rivers
you may see many of the miniature houses, laden with
manifold misfortunes, bobbing up and down on the current,
or sticking fast in the thickets that line the banks.<note place='foot'>C. Hupe, <q>Korte Verhandeling
over de Godsdienst, Zeden enz. der
Dajakkers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands
Indië</hi>, 1846, dl. iii. pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F.
Grabowsky, <q>Die Theogonie der Dajaken
auf Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie</hi>, v. (1892) p. 131.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils transferred
to other
persons
through the
medium of
things.</note>
These examples illustrate the purely beneficent side of
the transference of evil; they shew how men seek to
alleviate human sufferings by diverting them to material
objects, which are then thrown away or otherwise disposed
of so as to render them innocuous. Often, however, the
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
transference of evil to a material object is only a step
towards foisting it upon a living person. This is the
maleficent side of such transferences. It is exemplified
in the following cases. To cure toothache some of the
Australian blacks apply a heated spear-thrower to the cheek.
The spear-thrower is then cast away, and the toothache goes
with it in the shape of a black stone called <foreign rend='italic'>karriitch</foreign>. Stones
of this kind are found in old mounds and sandhills. They
are carefully collected and thrown in the direction of enemies
in order to give them toothache.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>
(Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide,
1881), p. 59.</note> In Mirzapur a mode of
transferring disease is to fill a pot with flowers and rice and
bury it in a pathway covered up with a flat stone. Whoever
touches this is supposed to contract the disease. The
practice is called <foreign rend='italic'>chalauwa</foreign>, or <q>passing on</q> the malady.
This sort of thing goes on daily in Upper India. Often
while walking of a morning in the bazaar you will see a little
pile of earth adorned with flowers in the middle of the road.
Such a pile usually contains some scabs or scales from the
body of a smallpox patient, which are placed there in the
hope that some one may touch them, and by catching the
disease may relieve the sufferer.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Bahima, a pastoral
people of the Uganda Protectorate, often suffer from deep-seated
abscesses: <q>their cure for this is to transfer the
disease to some other person by obtaining herbs from the
medicine-man, rubbing them over the place where the
swelling is, and burying them in the road where people
continually pass; the first person who steps over these
buried herbs contracts the disease, and the original patient
recovers.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>The Bahima,
a Cow Tribe of Enkole,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvii.
(1907) p. 103.</note> The practice of the Wagogo of German East
Africa is similar. When a man is ill, the native doctor will
take him to a cross-road, where he prepares his medicines,
uttering at the same time the incantations which are necessary
to give the drugs their medical virtue. Part of the
dose is then administered to the patient, and part is buried
under a pot turned upside down at the cross-road. It is
hoped that somebody will step over the pot, and catching
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
the disease, which lurks in the pot, will thereby relieve the
original sufferer. A variation of this cure is to plaster some
of the medicine, or a little of the patient's blood, on a
wooden peg and to drive the peg into a tree; any one who
passes the tree and is so imprudent as to draw out the peg,
will carry away with it the disease.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Cole, <q>Notes on the
Wagogo of German East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxiii. (1902) p. 313.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils transferred
to
images.
Mongol
transference
of evil
to things.</note>
Sometimes in case of sickness the malady is transferred
to an effigy as a preliminary to passing it on to a human
being. Thus among the Baganda the medicine-man would
sometimes make a model of his patient in clay; then a
relative of the sick man would rub the image over the
sufferer's body and either bury it in the road or hide it in
the grass by the wayside. The first person who stepped
over the image or passed by it would catch the disease.
Sometimes the effigy was made out of a plantain-flower tied
up so as to look like a person; it was used in the same way
as the clay figure. But the use of images for this maleficent
purpose was a capital crime; any person caught in the act
of burying one of them in the public road would surely have
been put to death.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Sena-speaking people to
the north of the Zambesi, when any one is ill, the doctor
makes a little pig of straw to which he transfers the sickness.
The little pig is then set on the ground where two paths
meet, and any passer-by who chances to kick it over is sure
to absorb the illness and to draw it away from the patient.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>
(London, 1904), p. 146.</note>
Among the Korkus, a forest tribe of the Central Provinces
in India, when a person wishes to transfer his sickness to
another, he contrives to obtain the loin-cloth of his intended
victim and paints two figures on it in lamp black, one
upright and the other upside down. As soon as the owner
of the loin-cloth puts it on, he falls a victim to the ailment
which afflicted the artist who drew the figures.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, iii., <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 63.</note> Every nine
years a Mongol celebrates a memorial festival of his birth
for the purpose of ensuring the continuance of his life and
welfare. At this solemn ceremony two lambskins, one
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
black and the other white, are spread on the floor of the hut,
which is further covered with a felt carpet, and on the
carpet are made nine little ridges of earth brought from nine
mountains, the bottom of a river, and a sepulchral mound.
The owner of the hut, for whose benefit the rite is performed,
next seats himself on the black lambskin, and
opposite him is set an effigy of himself made of dough by a
lama. The priest then throws a black stone at the effigy,
praying that the black arrow of death may pierce it, after
which he throws a white stone at the master of the hut,
praying that the bright beam of life may endow him with
wondrous strength. After that the Mongol gets up, steps
over one of the ridges of earth and says, <q>I have overcome
a mishap, I have escaped a death.</q> This ceremony he
performs nine times, stepping over all the ridges, one after
the other. Then he sits down on the white lambskin, and
the lama takes the dough effigy, swings it thrice round the
man whom it represents, spits on it thrice, and hands it to
attendants who carry it away into the steppe. A little
holy water sprinkled over the Mongol now completes his
protection against perils and dangers.<note place='foot'>M. v. Beguelin, <q>Religiöse Volksbräuche
der Mongolen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lvii.
(1890) pp. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This last is a case
of the beneficent transference of evil; for in it no attempt
seems to be made to shift the burden of misfortune to anybody
else.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Transference to Stones and Sticks.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Transference to Stones and Sticks.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fatigue
transferred
to stones,
sticks, or
leaves.</note>
In the western district of the island of Timor, when men
or women are making long and tiring journeys, they fan
themselves with leafy branches, which they afterwards throw
away on particular spots where their forefathers did the
same before them. The fatigue which they felt is thus
supposed to have passed into the leaves and to be left
behind. Others use stones instead of leaves.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Die Landschaft
Dawan oder West-Timor,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
geographische Blätter</hi>, x. 231.</note> Similarly in
the Babar Archipelago tired people will strike themselves
with stones, believing that they thus transfer to the
stones the weariness which they felt in their own bodies.
They then throw away the stones in places which are
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
specially set apart for the purpose.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), p. 340.</note> A like belief and
practice in many distant parts of the world have given
rise to those cairns or heaps of sticks and leaves which
travellers often observe beside the path, and to which
every passing native adds his contribution in the shape
of a stone, or stick, or leaf. Thus in the Solomon and
Banks' Islands the natives are wont to throw sticks,
stones, or leaves upon a heap at a place of steep descent,
or where a difficult path begins, saying, <q>There goes my
fatigue.</q> The act is not a religious rite, for the thing
thrown on the heap is not an offering to spiritual powers,
and the words which accompany the act are not a prayer.
It is nothing but a magical ceremony for getting rid of
fatigue, which the simple savage fancies he can embody in a
stick, leaf, or stone, and so cast it from him.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi> (Oxford, 1891), p. 186.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Heaps of
stones or
sticks
among the
American
Indians.</note>
An early Spanish missionary to Nicaragua, observing
that along the paths there were heaps of stones on which
the Indians as they passed threw grass, asked them why
they did so. <q>Because we think,</q> was the answer, <q>that
thereby we are kept from weariness and hunger, or at least
that we suffer less from them.</q><note place='foot'>G. F. de Oviedo, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire du
Nicaragua</hi> (Paris, 1840), pp. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(Ternaux-Compans, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages, Relations
et Mémoires originaux, pour servir
à l'Histoire de la Découverte de
l'Amérique</hi>).</note> When the Peruvian
Indians were climbing steep mountains and felt weary, they
used to halt by the way at certain points where there were
heaps of stones, which they called <foreign rend='italic'>apachitas</foreign>. On these
heaps the weary men would place other stones, and they
said that when they did so, their weariness left them.<note place='foot'>P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de
la Idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621),
pp. 37, 130. As to the custom compare
J. J. von Tschudi, <hi rend='italic'>Peru</hi> (St.
Gallen, 1846), ii. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. A.
Weddell, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans le Nord de la
Bolivia et dans les parties voisines du
Pérou</hi> (Paris and London, 1853), pp.
74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> These latter writers interpret
the stones as offerings.</note> In the
passes of the eastern Andes, on the borders of Argentina
and Bolivia, <q>large cairns are constantly found, and every
Puna Indian, on passing, adds a stone and a coca leaf, so
that neither he nor his beast of burden may tire on the way.</q><note place='foot'>Baron E. Nordenskiöld, <q>Travels
on the Boundaries of Bolivia and
Argentina,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Geographical Journal</hi>,
xxi. (1903) p. 518.</note>
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
In the country of the Tarahumares and Tepehuanes
in Mexico heaps of stones and sticks may be observed
on high points, where the track leads over a ridge between
two or more valleys. <q>Every Indian who passes such a pile
adds a stone or a stick to it in order to gain strength for his
journey. Among the Tarahumares only the old men observe
this custom. Whenever the Tepehuanes carry a corpse, they
rest it for some fifteen minutes on such a heap by the
wayside that the deceased may not be fatigued but strong
enough to finish his long journey to the land of the dead.
One of my Huichol companions stopped on reaching this
pile, pulled up some grass from the ground and picked up a
stone as big as his fist. Holding both together he spat on
the grass and on the stone and then rubbed them quickly
over his knees. He also made a couple of passes with them
over his chest and shoulders, exclaiming <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kenestíquai!</foreign></q>
(May I not get tired!) and then put the grass on the heap
and the stone on top of the grass.</q><note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), ii. 282.</note> In Guatemala also
piles of stones may be seen at the partings of ways and on the
tops of cliffs and mountains. Every passing Indian used to
gather a handful of grass, rub his legs with it, spit on it, and
deposit it with a small stone on the pile, firmly persuaded
that by so doing he would restore their flagging vigour to
his weary limbs.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique-Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
ii. 564; compare iii. 486.
Indians of Guatemala, when they cross
a pass for the first time, still commonly
add a stone to the cairn which marks
the spot. See C. Sapper, <q>Die
Gebräuche und religiösen Anschauungen
der Kekchi-Indianer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
viii. (1895) p. 197.</note> Here the rubbing of the limbs with the
grass, like the Babar custom of striking the body with a
stone, was doubtless a mode of extracting the fatigue from
them as a preliminary to throwing it away.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Heaps of
stones or
sticks
among the
natives of
Africa.</note>
Similarly on the plateau between Lakes Tanganyika and
Nyassa the native carriers, before they ascend a steep hill with
their loads, will pick up a stone, spit on it, rub the calves of
their legs with it, and then deposit it on one of those small
piles of stones which are commonly to be found at such spots
in this part of Africa. A recent English traveller, who noticed
the custom, was informed that the carriers practise it <q>to
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
make their legs light,</q><note place='foot'>F. F. R. Boileau, <q>The Nyasa-Tanganyika
Plateau,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Geographical
Journal</hi>, xiii. (1899) p. 589. In the
same region Mr. L. Decle observed
many trees or rocks on which were
placed little heaps of stones or bits of
wood, to which in passing each of his
men added a fresh stone or bit of wood
or a tuft of grass. <q>This,</q> says Mr.
L. Decle, <q>is a tribute to the spirits,
the general precaution to ensure a safe
return</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Three Years in Savage Africa</hi>,
London, 1898, p. 289). A similar
practice prevails among the Wanyamwezi
(<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 345). Compare J. A.
Grant, <hi rend='italic'>A Walk across Africa</hi> (Edinburgh
and London, 1864), pp. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> in other words, to extract the fatigue
from them. On the banks of the Kei river in Southern
Africa another English traveller noticed some heaps of
stones. On enquiring what they meant, he was told by his
guides that when a Caffre felt weary he had but to add a
stone to the heap to regain fresh vigour.<note place='foot'>Cowper Rose, <hi rend='italic'>Four Years in
Southern Africa</hi> (London, 1829), p.
147.</note> In some parts of
South Africa, particularly on the Zambesi, piles of sticks
take the place of cairns. <q>Sometimes the natives will rub
their leg with a stick, and throw the stick on the heap, <q>to
get rid of fatigue,</q> they avow. Others say that throwing
a stone on the heap gives one fresh vigour for the
journey.</q><note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>
(London, 1904), p. 264.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The heaps
of stones
or sticks
generally
on the
tops of
mountains
or passes.</note>
From other accounts of the Caffre custom we learn that
these cairns are generally on the sides or tops of mountains,
and that before a native deposits his stone on the pile he
spits on it.<note place='foot'>S. Kay, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches in
Caffraria</hi> (London, 1833), pp. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious System of
the Amazulu</hi>, i. 66; D. Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among
the Zulus and Amatongas</hi> (Edinburgh,
1875), pp. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare H.
Lichtenstein, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im südlichen
Africa</hi> (Berlin, 1811-1812), i. 411.</note> The practice of spitting on the stone which the
weary wayfarer lays on the pile is probably a mode of transferring
his fatigue the more effectually to the material
vehicle which is to rid him of it. We have seen that the
practice prevails among the Indians of Guatemala and the
natives of the Tanganyika plateau, and it appears to be
observed also under similar circumstances in Corea, where
the cairns are to be found especially on the tops of passes.<note place='foot'>W. Gowland, <q>Dolmens and other
Antiquities of Corea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxiv. (1895)
pp. 328 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mrs. Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea and
her Neighbours</hi> (London, 1898), i.
147, ii. 223. Both writers speak as
if the practice were to spit on the
cairn rather than on the particular
stone which the traveller adds to it;
indeed, Mrs. Bishop omits to notice
the custom of adding to the cairns.
Mr. Gowland says that almost every
traveller carries up at least one stone
from the valley and lays it on the pile.</note>
From the primitive point of view nothing can be more
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
natural than that the cairns or the heaps of sticks and leaves
to which the tired traveller adds his contribution should
stand at the top of passes and, in general, on the highest
points of the road. The wayfarer who has toiled, with
aching limbs and throbbing temples, up a long and steep
ascent, is aware of a sudden alleviation as soon as he has
reached the summit; he feels as if a weight had been lifted
from him, and to the savage, with his concrete mode of
thought, it seems natural and easy to cast the weight from
him in the shape of a stone or stick, or a bunch of leaves or
of grass. Hence it is that the piles which represent the
accumulated weariness of many foot-sore and heavy-laden
travellers are to be seen wherever the road runs highest in
the lofty regions of Bolivia, Tibet, Bhootan, and Burma,<note place='foot'>D. Forbes, <q>On the Aymara
Indians of Peru and Bolivia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Ethnological Society of London</hi>,
ii. (1870) pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. C. Musters,
<q>Notes on Bolivia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Geographical Society</hi>, xlvii.
(1877) p. 211; T. T. Cooper, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
of a Pioneer of Commerce</hi> (London,
1871), p. 275; J. A. H. Louis, <hi rend='italic'>The
Gates of Thibet, a Bird's Eye View of
Independent Sikkhim, British Bhootan,
and the Dooars</hi> (Calcutta, 1894), pp.
111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des
östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. (Leipsic, 1866) p.
483. So among the Mrus of Aracan,
every man who crosses a hill, on reaching
the crest, plucks a fresh young
shoot of grass and lays it on a pile of the
withered deposits of former travellers
(T. H. Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Races of South-Eastern
India</hi>, London, 1870, pp.
232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> in
the passes of the Andes and the Himalayas, as well as in
Corea, Caffraria, Guatemala, and Melanesia.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fatigue let
out with
the blood.</note>
While the mountaineer Indians of South America
imagine that they can rid themselves of their fatigue in
the shape of a stick or a stone, other or the same aborigines
of that continent believe that they can let it out with their
blood. A French explorer, who had seen much of the
South American Indians, tells us that <q>they explain everything
that they experience by attributing it to sorcery, to
the influence of maleficent beings. Thus an Indian on the
march, when he feels weary, never fails to ascribe his weariness
to the evil spirit; and if he has no diviner at hand, he
wounds himself in the knees, the shoulders, and on the arms
in order to let out the evil with the blood. That is why
many Indians, especially the Aucas [Araucanians], have
always their arms covered with scars. This custom,
differently applied, is almost general in America; for I
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
found it up to the foot of the Andes, in Bolivia, among the
Chiriguana and Yuracares nations.</q><note place='foot'>A. d'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Amérique Méridionale</hi>, ii. (Paris and Strasburg,
1839-1843) pp. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Piles of
stones or
sticks on
the scene
of crimes. The Liar's
Heap.</note>
But it is not mere bodily fatigue which the savage fancies
he can rid himself of by the simple expedient of throwing a
stick or a stone. Unable clearly to distinguish the immaterial
from the material, the abstract from the concrete,
he is assailed by vague terrors, he feels himself exposed to
some ill-defined danger on the scene of any great crime or
great misfortune. The place to him seems haunted ground.
The thronging memories that crowd upon his mind, if they
are not mistaken by him for goblins and phantoms, oppress
his fancy with a leaden weight. His impulse is to flee from
the dreadful spot, to shake off the burden that seems to cling
to him like a nightmare. This, in his simple sensuous way,
he thinks he can do by casting something at the horrid place
and hurrying by. For will not the contagion of misfortune,
the horror that clutched at his heart-strings, be diverted from
himself into the thing? will it not gather up in itself all the
evil influences that threatened him, and so leave him to
pursue his journey in safety and peace? Some such train
of thought, if these gropings and fumblings of a mind in
darkness deserve the name of thought, seems to explain the
custom, observed by wayfarers in many lands, of throwing
sticks or stones on places where something horrible has
happened or evil deeds have been done. When Sir Francis
Younghusband was travelling across the great desert of Gobi
his caravan descended, towards dusk on a June evening, into
a long depression between the hills, which was notorious as
a haunt of robbers. His guide, with a terror-stricken face,
told how not long before nine men out of a single caravan
had been murdered, and the rest left in a pitiable state to
continue their journey on foot across the awful desert. A
horseman, too, had just been seen riding towards the hills.
<q>We had accordingly to keep a sharp look-out, and when
we reached the foot of the hills, halted, and, taking the loads
off the camels, wrapped ourselves up in our sheepskins and
watched through the long hours of the night. Day broke at
last, and then we silently advanced and entered the hills.
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
Very weird and fantastic in their rugged outline were they,
and here and there a cairn of stones marked where some
caravan had been attacked, and as we passed these each man
threw one more stone on the heap.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) F. E. Younghusband, <q>A
Journey across Central Asia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the Royal Geographical Society</hi>,
x. (1888) p. 494.</note> In the Norwegian
district of Tellemarken a cairn is piled up wherever anything
fearful has happened, and every passer-by must throw
another stone on it, or some evil will befall him.<note place='foot'>F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>
(Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Sweden
and the Esthonian island of Oesel the same custom is practised
on scenes of clandestine or illicit love, with the strange
addition in Oesel that when a man has lost his cattle he will
go to such a spot, and, while he flings a stick or stone on it,
will say, <q>I bring thee wood. Let me soon find my lost
cattle.</q><note place='foot'>F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, p.
274; J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. (1872) p.
73.</note> Far from these northern lands, the Dyaks of
Batang Lupar keep up an observance of the same sort in the
forests of Borneo. Beside their paths may be seen heaps of
sticks or stones which are called <q>lying heaps.</q> Each heap
is in memory of some man who told a stupendous lie or disgracefully
failed in carrying out an engagement, and everybody
who passes adds a stick or stone to the pile, saying as
he does so, <q>For So-and-so's lying heap.</q><note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1863), i. 88.</note> The Dyaks
think it a sacred duty to add to every such <q>liar's mound</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>tugong bula</foreign>) which they pass; they imagine that the omission
of the duty would draw down on them a supernatural punishment.
Hence, however pressed a Dyak may be for time, he
will always stop to throw on the pile some branches or
twigs.<note place='foot'>E. H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>Seventeen Years
among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</hi> (London,
1911), pp. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The person to start such a heap is one of the men
who has suffered by a malicious lie. He takes a stick, throws
it down on some spot where people are constantly passing,
and says, <q>Let any one who does not add to this liar's heap
suffer from pains in the head.</q> Others then do likewise, and
every passer-by throws a stick on the spot lest he should suffer
pains. In this way the heap often grows to a large size, and
the liar by whose name it is known is greatly ashamed.<note place='foot'>Ch. Hose and W. McDougall,
<hi rend='italic'>The Pagan Tribes of Borneo</hi> (London,
1912), i. 123.</note>
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Heaps of
stones,
sticks, or
leaves on
scenes of
murder.
Heaps of
stones or
sticks on
graves.</note>
But it is on scenes of murder and sudden death that this
rude method of averting evil is most commonly practised. The
custom that every passer-by must cast a stone or stick on
the spot where some one has come to a violent end, whether
by murder or otherwise, has been observed in practically the
same form in such many and diverse parts of the world as
Ireland, France, Spain, Sweden, Germany, Bohemia, Lesbos,
Morocco, Armenia, Palestine, Arabia, India, North America,
Venezuela, Bolivia, Celebes, and New Zealand.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <q>A Batch of Irish
Folk-lore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iv. (1893) pp.
357, 360; Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances
et Légendes du Centre de la France</hi>
(Paris, 1875), ii. 75, 77; J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 309; Hylten-Cavallius,
quoted by F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur
Volkskunde</hi>, p. 274; K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch
der Lausitz</hi> (Leipsic, 1862-1863),
ii. 65; K. Müllenhoff, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen
und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig,
Holstein und Lauenburg</hi> (Kiel, 1845),
p. 125; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen
und Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 113;
A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>
(Leipsic, 1848), p. 85; A.
Treichel, <q>Reisighäufung und Steinhäufung
an Mordstellen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Am Ur-Quelle</hi>,
vi. (1896) p. 220; Georgeakis
et Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore de Lesbos</hi>, p. 323;
A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>
(London, 1876), pp. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E.
Doutté, <q>Figuig,</q> <hi rend='italic'>La Géographie,
Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), vii. (1903) p. 197; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Magie
et Religion dans l'Afrique du Nord</hi>
(Algiers, 1908), pp. 424 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. von
Haxthausen, <hi rend='italic'>Transkaukasia</hi> (Leipsic,
1856), i. 222; C. T. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant
Life in the Holy Land</hi> (London,
1906), p. 285; W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Religion and Folk-lore of Northern
India</hi> (Westminster, 1896), i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. Bricknell, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural History of
North Carolina</hi> (Dublin, 1737), p. 380;
J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi> (London, 1775), p. 184; K.
Martin, <hi rend='italic'>Bericht über eine Reise nach
Nederlandsch West-Indien</hi>, Erster Theil
(Leyden, 1887), p. 166; G. C. Musters,
<q>Notes on Bolivia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Geographical Society</hi>, xlvii.
(1877) p. 211; B. F. Matthes,
<hi rend='italic'>Einige Eigenthümlichkeiten in den
Festen und Gewohnheiten der Makassaren
und Büginesen</hi>, p. 25 (separate
reprint from <hi rend='italic'>Travaux de la 6e Session
du Congrès International des Orientalistes
à Leide</hi>, vol. ii.); R. A. Cruise,
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Ten Months' Residence in
New Zealand</hi> (London, 1823), p. 186.</note> In Fiji, for
example, it was the practice for every passer-by to throw a leaf
on the spot where a man had been clubbed to death; <q>this
was considered as an offering of respect to him, and, if not
performed, they have a notion they will soon be killed themselves.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition</hi>,
New Edition (New York, 1851), iii.
50.</note>
Sometimes the scene of the murder or death may
also be the grave of the victim, but it need not always be
so, and in Europe, where the dead are buried in consecrated
ground, the two places would seldom coincide. However,
the custom of throwing stones or sticks on a grave has
undoubtedly been observed by passers-by in many parts
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
of the world, and that, too, even when the graves are not
those of persons who have come to a violent end. Thus
we are told that the people of Unalashka, one of the
Aleutian Islands, bury their dead on the summits of hills
and raise a little hillock over the grave. <q>In a walk into
the country, one of the natives, who attended me, pointed
out several of these receptacles of the dead. There was one
of them, by the side of the road leading from the harbour to
the village, over which was raised a heap of stones. It was
observed, that every one who passed it, added one to it.</q><note place='foot'>Captain James Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi>
(London, 1809), vi. 479.</note>
The Roumanians of Transylvania think that a dying man
should have a burning candle in his hand, and that any one
who dies without a light has no right to the ordinary funeral
ceremonies. The body of such an unfortunate is not laid in
holy ground, but is buried wherever it may be found. His
grave is marked only by a heap of dry branches, to which
each passer-by is expected to add a handful of twigs or a
thorny bough.<note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi> (Edinburgh and London, 1888),
i. 311, 318.</note> The Hottentot god or hero Heitsi-eibib
died several times and came to life again. When the
Hottentots pass one of his numerous graves they throw a
stone, a bush, or a fresh branch on it for good luck.<note place='foot'>H. Lichtenstein, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im Südlichen
Africa</hi> (Berlin, 1811-1812), i.
349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Sir James E. Alexander, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition
of Discovery into the Interior
of Africa</hi> (London, 1838), i. 166; C. J.
Andersson, <hi rend='italic'>Lake Ngami</hi>, Second Edition
(London, 1856), p. 327; W. H. I.
Bleek, <hi rend='italic'>Reynard the Fox in South Africa</hi>
(London, 1864), p. 76; Th. Hahn,
<hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam, the Supreme Being of
the Khoi-Khoi</hi> (London, 1881), p. 56.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 3.</note> Near
the former mission-station of Blydeuitzigt in Cape Colony
there was a spot called Devil's Neck where, in the opinion
of the Bushmen, the devil was interred. To hinder his
resurrection stones were piled in heaps about the place.
When a Bushman, travelling in the company of a missionary,
came in sight of the spot he seized a stone and hurled it at
the grave, remarking that if he did not do so his neck would
be twisted round so that he would have to look backwards
for the term of his natural life.<note place='foot'>Th. Hahn, <q>Die Buschmänner,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, xviii. 141.</note> Stones are cast by passers-by
on the graves of murderers in some parts of Senegambia.<note place='foot'>Th. Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie der
Naturvölker</hi>, ii. (Leipsic, 1860) p.
195, referring to Raffenel, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveau
Voyage dans le pays des nègres</hi> (Paris,
1856), i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
In Syria deceased robbers are not buried like honest folk,
but left to rot where they lie; and a pile of stones is raised
over the mouldering corpse. Every one who passes such a
pile must fling a stone at it, on pain of incurring God's
malison.<note place='foot'>Eijūb Abēla, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
abergläubischer Gebräuche in
Syrien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Deutschen
Palaestina-Vereins</hi>, vii. (1884) p. 102.</note> Between sixty and seventy years ago an Englishman
was travelling from Sidon to Tyre with a couple of
Musalmans. When he drew near Tyre his companions
picked up some small stones, armed him in the same fashion,
and requested him to be so kind as to follow their example.
Soon afterwards they came in sight of a conical heap of
pebbles and stones standing in the road, at which the two
Musalmans hurled stones and curses with great vehemence
and remarkable volubility. When they had discharged this
pious duty to their satisfaction, they explained that the
missiles and maledictions were directed at a celebrated
robber and murderer, who had been knocked on the head
and buried there some half a century before.<note place='foot'>Note by G. P. Badger, on <hi rend='italic'>The
Travels of Ludovico di Varthema</hi>, translated
by J. W. Jones (Hakluyt Society,
1863), p. 45. For more evidence of
the custom in Syria see W. M. Thomson,
<hi rend='italic'>The Land and the Book</hi> (London,
1859), p. 490; F. Sessions, <q>Some
Syrian Folklore Notes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, ix.
(1898) p. 15; A. Jaussen, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes
des Arabes au pays de Moab</hi> (Paris,
1908), p. 336.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Stones
and sticks
hurled as
missiles at
dangerous
ghosts and
demons. Missiles to
ward off
dangerous
ghosts.</note>
In these latter cases it may perhaps be thought that the
sticks and stones serve no other purpose than to keep off
the angry and dangerous ghost who might be supposed
to haunt either the place of death or the grave. This
interpretation seems certainly to apply to some cases of the
custom. For example, in Pomerania and West Prussia the
ghosts of suicides are much feared. Such persons are
buried, not in the churchyard, but at the place where they
took their lives, and every passer-by must cast a stone or a
stick on the spot, or the ghost of the suicide will haunt him
by night and give him no rest. Hence the piles of sticks or
stones accumulated on the graves of these poor wretches
sometimes attain a considerable size.<note place='foot'>A. Treichel, <q>Reisig- und Steinhäufung
bei Ermordeten oder Selbstmördern,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie
und Urgeschichte, 1888</hi>, p. (569)
(bound up with <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xx. 1888).</note> Similarly the Baganda
of Central Africa used to stand in great fear of the ghosts of
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
suicides and they took many precautions to disarm or even
destroy these dangerous spirits. For this purpose the bodies
of suicides were removed to waste land or cross-roads and
burned there, together with the wood of the house in which
the deed had been done or of the tree on which the person
had hanged himself. By these means they imagined that
they destroyed the ghost so that he could not come and
lure others to follow his bad example. Lest, however, the
ghost should survive the destruction of his body by fire, the
Baganda, in passing any place where a suicide had been
burnt, always threw grass or sticks on the spot to prevent
the ghost from catching them. And they did the same, for
the same reason, whenever they passed the places on waste
ground where persons accused of witchcraft and found guilty
by the poison ordeal had been burnt to death. Baganda
women had a special reason for dreading all graves which
were believed to be haunted by dangerous ghosts; for,
imagining that they could conceive children without intercourse
with the other sex, they feared to be impregnated by
the entrance into them of the ghosts of suicides and other
unfortunate or uncanny people, such as persons with a light
complexion, twins, and particularly all who had the mishap
to be born feet foremost. For that reason Baganda women
were at pains, whenever they passed the graves of any such
persons, to throw sticks or grass upon them; <q>for by so
doing they thought that they could prevent the ghost of the
dead from entering into them, and being reborn.</q> Hence
the mounds which accumulated over these graves became
in course of time large enough to deflect the path and to
attract the attention of travellers. It was not merely
matrons who thus took care not to become mothers unaware;
the same fears were entertained and the same precautions
were adopted by all women, whether old or young, whether
married or single; since they thought that there was no
woman, whatever her age or condition, who might not be
impregnated by the entrance into her of a spirit.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
124 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Stones are
not mentioned among the missiles
hurled at ghosts, probably because
stones are scarce in Uganda. See
J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 5.</note> In these
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
cases, therefore, the throwing of sticks or grass at graves is
a purely defensive measure; the missiles are intended to
ward off the assaults of dangerous ghosts. Similarly we
are told that in Madagascar solitary graves by the wayside
have a sinister reputation, and that passers-by, without
looking back, will throw stones or clods at them <q>to prevent
the evil spirits from following them.</q><note place='foot'>Father Finaz, S.J., in <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, vii. (1875) p. 328.</note> The Maraves of
South Africa, like the Baganda, used to burn witches alive
and to throw stones on the places of execution whenever
they passed them, so that in time regular cairns gradually
rose on these spots.<note place='foot'><q>Der Muata Cazembe und die
Völkerstämme der Maraves, Chevas,
Muembas, Lundas, und andere von
Süd-Afrika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Erdkunde</hi>, vi. (1856) p. 287.</note> No doubt with these Maraves, as with
the Baganda, the motive for throwing missiles at such places
is to protect themselves against the ghosts. A protective
motive is also assigned for a similar custom observed in
Chota Nagpur, a region of India which is the home of
many primitive tribes. There heaps of stones or of leaves
and branches may often be seen beside the path; they are
supposed to mark the places where people have been killed
by wild beasts, and the natives think that any passer-by who
failed to add a stone or a stick to the pile would himself be
seized and devoured by a wild animal.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal</hi>, lxxii. Part iii. (Calcutta, 1904)
p. 87.</note> Here, though the
ghost is not explicitly mentioned, we may perhaps suppose
that out of spite he is instrumental in causing others to
perish by the same untimely death by which he was himself
carried off. The Kayans of Borneo imagine that they can
put evil spirits to flight by hurling sticks or stones at them;
so on a journey they will let fly volleys of such missiles
at the rocks and dens where demons are known to reside.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1900), i. 146.</note>
Hence, whenever the throwing of stones at a grave is
regarded as an insult to the dead, we may suppose that
the missiles are intended to hit and hurt the ghost.
Thus Euripides represents the murderer Aegisthus as leaping
on the tomb of his victim Agamemnon and pelting it
with stones;<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Electra</hi>, 327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and Propertius invites all lovers to discharge
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
stones and curses at the dishonoured grave of an old
bawd.<note place='foot'>Propertius, v. 5. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But the
stones
and sticks
thrown
on heaps
cannot
always be
explained
as missiles
discharged
at spiritual
foes. Cairns
raised in
honour of
Moslem
saints.</note>
But if this theory seems adequately to account for some
cases of the custom with which we are concerned, it apparently
fails to explain others. The view that the sticks and
stones hurled at certain places are weapons turned against
dangerous or malignant spirits is plausible in cases where
such spirits are believed to be in the neighbourhood; but in
cases where no such spirits are thought to be lurking, we
must, it would seem, cast about for some other explanation.
For example, we have seen that it has been customary to
throw sticks or stones on spots which have been defiled by
deeds of moral turpitude without any shedding of blood,
and again on spots where weary travellers stop to rest. It
is difficult to suppose that in these latter cases the evil deeds
or the sensations of fatigue are conceived in the concrete
shape of demons whom it is necessary to repel by missiles,
though many South American Indians, as we saw, do attribute
fatigue to a demon. Still more difficult is it to apply
the purely defensive theory to cases where beneficent spirits
are imagined to be hovering somewhere near, and where the
throwing of the stones or sticks is apparently regarded by
those who practise it as a token of respect rather than of
hostility. Thus amongst the Masai, when any one dies away
from the kraal, his body is left lying on the spot where he
died, and all persons present throw bunches of grass or
leaves on the corpse. Afterwards every passer-by casts a
stone or a handful of grass on the place, and the more the
dead man was respected, the longer is the usage observed.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), p. 193.</note>
It is especially the graves of Masai medicine-men that are
honoured in this way.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi> (Oxford,
1905), pp. 305 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the forest near Avestad, in
Sweden, the traveller, Clarke, observed <q>several heaps made
with sticks and stones; upon which the natives, as they
pass, cast either a stone, or a little earth, or the bough of a
tree; deeming it an uncharitable act to omit this tribute, in
their journeys to and fro. As this custom appeared closely
allied to the pious practice in the Highlands of Scotland, of
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
casting a stone upon the cairn of a deceased person, we, of
course, concluded these heaps were places of sepulture.</q>
They were said to be the graves of a band of robbers, who
had plundered merchants on their passage through the
forest, but had afterwards been killed and buried where they
fell.<note place='foot'>E. D. Clarke, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in various
Countries of Europe and Asia</hi>, vi.
(London, 1823) p. 165.</note> However, in all these cases the practice of throwing
stones on the grave, though interpreted as a mark of respect
and charity, may really be based on the fear of the ghosts,
so that the motive for observing the custom may be merely
that of self-defence against a dangerous spirit. Yet this
explanation can hardly apply to certain other cases. Thus
in Syria it is a common practice with pious Moslems, when
they first come in sight of a very sacred place, such as
Hebron or the tomb of Moses, to make a little heap of
stones or to add a stone to a heap which has been already
made. Hence every here and there the traveller passes a
whole series of such heaps by the side of the track.<note place='foot'>W. H. D. Rouse, <q>Notes from
Syria,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895) p. 173.
Compare F. Sessions, <q>Some Syrian
Folklore Notes, gathered on Mount
Lebanon,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, ix. (1898) p.
15.</note> In
Northern Africa the usage is similar. Cairns are commonly
erected on spots from which the devout pilgrim first discerns
the shrine of a saint afar off; hence they are generally to
be seen on the top of passes. For example, in Morocco, at
the point of the road from Casablanca to Azemmour, where
you first come in sight of the white city of the saint gleaming
in the distance, there rises an enormous cairn of stones
shaped like a pyramid several hundreds of feet high, and
beyond it on both sides of the road there is a sort of
avalanche of stones, either standing singly or arranged in
little pyramids. Every pious Mohammedan whose eyes are
gladdened by the blessed sight of the sacred town adds his
stone to one of the piles or builds a little pile for himself.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l' Afrique du Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908), pp.
420-422.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Stones as
channels
of communication
with saints,
living or
dead.</note>
Such a custom can hardly be explained as a precaution
adopted against a dangerous influence supposed to emanate
from the saint and to communicate itself even to people at
a distance. On the contrary, it points rather to a desire
of communion with the holy man than to a wish to keep
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
him at bay. The mode of communion adopted, however
strange it may seem to us, is apparently quite in harmony
with the methods by which good Mohammedans in Northern
Africa attempt to appropriate to themselves the blessed
influence (<foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>baraka</foreign>) which is supposed to radiate on all sides
from the person of a living saint. <q>It is impossible to
imagine,</q> we are told, <q>the extremity to which the belief in
the blessed influence of saints is carried in North Africa.
To form an exact idea of it you must see a great saint
in the midst of the faithful. <q>The people fling themselves
down on his path to kiss the skirt of his robe, to kiss his
stirrup if he is on horseback, to kiss even his footprint if he
is on foot. Those who are too far from him to be able
to touch his hand touch him with their staff, or fling a stone
at him which they have marked previously so as to be able
to find it afterwards and to embrace it devoutly.</q></q><note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi>, p. 440, quoting De
Ségonzac, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Maroc</hi>, p. 82.</note> Thus
through the channel of the stone or the stick, which has
been in bodily contact with the living saint, his blessed
influence flows to the devotee who has wielded the stick or
hurled the stone. In like manner we may perhaps suppose
that the man who adds a stone to a cairn in honour of a
dead saint hopes to benefit by the saintly effluence which
distils in a mysterious fashion through the stone to him.<note place='foot'><p>I follow the exposition of E.
Doutté, whose account of the sanctity
or magical influence (<foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>baraka</foreign>) ascribed
to the persons of living Mohammedan
saints (marabouts) is very instructive.
See his <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi>, pp. 438 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Mr.
E. S. Hartland had previously explained
the custom of throwing stones and
sticks on cairns as acts of ceremonial
union with the spirit who is supposed
to reside in the cairn. See his <hi rend='italic'>Legend
of Perseus</hi>, ii. (London, 1895) p. 128.
While this theory offers a plausible explanation
of some cases of the custom,
I do not think that it will cover them
all. M. René Dussaud argues that the
stones deposited at shrines of holy men
are simply material embodiments of the
prayers which at the same time the
suppliants address to the saints; and
he holds that the practice of depositing
stones at such places rests on a principle
entirely different from that of
throwing stones for the purpose of repelling
evil spirits. See René Dussaud,
<q>La matérialisation de la prière en
Orient,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletins et Mémoires de la
Société d' Anthropologie de Paris</hi>, V.
Série, vii. (1906) pp. 213-220. If I
am right, the fundamental idea in these
customs is neither that the stones or
sticks are offerings presented to good
spirits nor that they are missiles hurled
at bad ones, but that they embody the
evil, whether disease, misfortune, fear,
horror, or what not, of which the person
attempts to rid himself by transferring
it to a material vehicle. But I
am far from confident that this explanation
applies to all cases. In particular
it is difficult to reconcile it with the
custom, described in the text, of throwing a marked stone at a holy man and
then recovering it. Are we to suppose
that the stone carries away the evil to
the good man and brings back his
blessing instead? The idea is perhaps
too subtle and far-fetched.
</p>
<p>
The word <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>baraka</foreign>, which in North
Africa describes the powerful and in
general beneficent, yet dangerous, influence
which emanates from holy persons
and things, is no doubt identical
with the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>bĕrakhah</foreign> (ברכה)
<q>blessing.</q> The importance which the
ancient Hebrews ascribed to the blessing
or the curse of a holy man is
familiar to us from many passages in
the Old Testament. See, for example,
Genesis xxvii., xlviii. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Deuteronomy
xxvii. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, xxviii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></p></note>
</p>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rite
of throwing
sticks or
stones is
perhaps
best explained
as
a mode of
purification,
the
evil being
thought
to be
embodied
in the
missile
which is
thrown
away.</note>
When we survey the many different cases in which
passing travellers are accustomed to add stones or sticks
to existing piles, it seems difficult, if not impossible, to
explain them all on one principle; different and even
opposite motives appear, at least at first sight, to have
operated in different cases to produce customs superficially
alike. Sometimes the motive for throwing the stone is to
ward off a dangerous spirit; sometimes it is to cast away an
evil; sometimes it is to acquire a good. Yet, perhaps, if we
could trace them back to their origin in the mind of primitive
man, we might find that they all resolve themselves
more or less exactly into the principle of the transference of
evil. For to rid ourselves of an evil and to acquire a good
are often merely opposite sides of one and the same operation;
for example, a convalescent regains health in exactly
the same proportion as he shakes off his malady. And
though the practice of throwing stones at dangerous spirits
especially at mischievous and malignant ghosts of the dead,
appears to spring from a different motive, yet it may be
questioned whether the difference is really as great to the
savage as it seems to us. To primitive man the idea of
spiritual and ghostly powers is still more indefinite than it is
to his civilized brother: it fills him with a vague uneasiness
and alarm; and this sentiment of dread and horror he, in
accordance with his habitual modes of thought, conceives in
a concrete form as something material which either surrounds
and oppresses him like a fog, or has entered into and taken
temporary possession of his body. In either case he imagines
that he can rid himself of the uncanny thing by stripping it
from his skin or wrenching it out of his body and transferring
it to some material substance, whether a stick, a stone, or
what not, which he can cast from him, and so, being eased
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
of his burden, can hasten away from the dreadful spot with
a lighter heart. Thus the throwing of the sticks or stones
would be a form of ceremonial purification, which among
primitive peoples is commonly conceived as a sort of
physical rather than moral purgation, a mode of sweeping
or scouring away the morbid matter by which the polluted
person is supposed to be infected. This notion perhaps
explains the rite of stone-throwing observed by pilgrims at
Mecca; on the day of sacrifice every pilgrim has to cast
seven stones on a cairn, and the rite is repeated thrice on
the three following days. The traditional explanation of
the custom is that Mohammed here drove away the devil
with a shower of stones;<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908),
pp. 430 sq.; J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste
arabischen Heidentums</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1897),
p. 111. The explanation given in the
text is regarded as probable by Professor
M. J. de Goeje (<hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, xvi. ,1904,
p. 42.)</note> but the original idea may perhaps
have been that the pilgrims cleanse themselves by transferring
their ceremonial impurity to the stones which they
fling on the heap.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This interpretation
of stone-throwing
agrees with
ancient
Greek and
Indian
tradition
and
custom.</note>
The theory that the throwing of stones is practised in
certain circumstances as a mode of purification tallies very
well with the tradition as to the origin of those cairns which
were to be seen by wayside images of Hermes in ancient
Greece, and to which every passer-by added a stone. It
was said that when Hermes was tried by the gods for the
murder of Argus all the gods flung stones at him as a
means of freeing themselves from the pollution contracted
by bloodshed; the stones thus thrown made a great heap,
and the custom of rearing such heaps at wayside images of
Hermes continued ever afterwards.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
Ἑρμαῖον, pp. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Eustathius on
Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, xvi. 471. As to the
heaps of stones see Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae
Graecae Compendium</hi>, 16; Babrius,
<hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>, xlviii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
Ἑρμαῖον; Scholiast on Nicander,
<hi rend='italic'>Ther.</hi> 150; M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische
Feste</hi> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 388
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The method of execution by
stoning may perhaps have been resorted
to in order to avoid the pollution
which would be entailed by contact
with the guilty and dying man.</note> Similarly Plato recommended
that if any man had murdered his father or mother,
his brother or sister, his son or daughter, he should be
put to death, and that his body should be cast forth
naked at a cross-road outside of the city. There the
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
magistrates should assemble on behalf of the city, each
carrying in his hand a stone, which he was to cast at
the head of the corpse by way of purifying the city from
the pollution it had contracted by the crime. After that
the corpse was to be carried away and flung outside
the boundaries.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi>, ix. 12, p. 873 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a-c</hi>
λίθον ἕκαστος φέρων ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν τοῦ
νεκροῦ βάλλων ἀφοσιούτω τὴν πόλιν ὅλην.</note> In these cases it would seem that the
pollution incurred by the vicinity of a murderer is thought
to be gathered up in the stones as a material vehicle and
to be thrown away with them. A sacrificial custom of the
Brahmans, prescribed in one of their sacred books, is susceptible
of a like interpretation. At a certain stage of the
ritual the sacrificer is directed to put a stone into a water-pot
and to throw it away in a south-westerly direction,
because that is the region of Nirriti, the goddess of Evil or
Destruction. With the stone and the pitcher he is supposed
to cast away his pain and evil; and he can transfer the pain
to another by saying, as he throws away the stone and the
pitcher, <q>Let thy pain enter him whom we hate,</q> or <q>Let
thy pain enter so-and-so,</q> naming his enemy; but in order
to ensure the transference of the pain to his enemy he must
take care that the stone or the pitcher is broken.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, ix. 1. 2.
9-12, Part iv. p. 171 of J. Eggeling's
translation (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the East</hi>,
vol. xliii., Oxford, 1897). As to Nirriti,
the Goddess of Destruction, see H.
Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des Veda</hi>
(Berlin, 1894), pp. 323, 351, 354, 489
note 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
throwing
of sticks
or stones
on piles is
sometimes
explained
as a
sacrifice. Certainly
the throwing
of
stones is
sometimes
accompanied
by
sacrifices. Heaps of
sticks at
the fords
of rivers in
Africa.</note>
This mode of interpreting the custom of throwing sticks
and stones on piles appears preferable to the one which has
generally found favour with European travellers and writers.
Imperfectly acquainted for the most part with the notions
which underlie primitive magic, but very familiar with the
religious conception of a deity who requires sacrifice of his
worshippers, they are apt to interpret the missiles in question
as cheap and easy offerings presented by pious but
frugal worshippers to ghosts or spirits whose favour they
desire to win.<note place='foot'>See, for example, O. Baumann,
<hi rend='italic'>Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</hi>
(Berlin, 1894), p. 214; G. M. Dawson,
<q>Notes on the Shuswap People of
British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Royal Society of Canada</hi>, ix. (1891)
section ii. p. 38; F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur
Volkskunde</hi> (Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 267
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 276, 278 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. Andree,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1878), p. 48; Catat,
in <hi rend='italic'>Le Tour du Monde</hi>, lxv. (1893), p.
40. Some of these writers have made
a special study of the practices in question.
See F. Liebrecht, <q>Die geworfenen
Steine,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, pp.
267-284; R. Andree, <q>Steinhaufen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>,
pp. 46-58; E. S. Hartland,
<hi rend='italic'>The Legend of Perseus</hi>, ii. (London,
1895) pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Doutté,
<hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans l'Afrique du
Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908), pp. 419 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
With the views of the last of these
writers I am in general agreement.</note> Whether a likely mode of conciliating a
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
ghost or spirit is to throw sticks and stones at him is a question
about which opinions might perhaps differ. It is difficult
to speak with confidence about the tastes of spiritual beings,
but as a rule they bear a remarkable likeness to those of
mere ordinary mortals, and it may be said without fear of
contradiction that few of the latter would be gratified by
being set up as a common target to be aimed at with sticks
and stones by everybody who passed within range.<note place='foot'>However, at the waterfall of Kriml,
in the Tyrol, it is customary for every
passer-by to throw a stone into the
water; and this attention is said to
put the water-spirits in high good
humour; for they follow the wayfarer
who has complied with the custom and
guard him from all the perils of the
dangerous path. See F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Munich,
1848-1855), ii. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Yet it
is quite possible that a ceremony, which at first was purely
magical, may in time have a religious gloss or interpretation
put on it even by those who practise it; and this seems in
fact to have sometimes happened to the particular custom
under consideration. Certainly some people accompany the
throwing of the stone on the pile with the presentation of
useful articles, which can hardly serve any other purpose
than that of propitiating some local spirits. Thus travellers
in Sikhim and Bhootan offer flour and wine, as well as stones,
at the cairns; and they also burn incense and recite incantations
or prayers,<note place='foot'>J. A. H. Louis, <hi rend='italic'>The Gates of
Thibet</hi>, Second Edition (Calcutta,
1894), pp. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> or they tear strips from their garments, tie
them to twigs or stones, and then lay them on the cairn, calling
out to the spirit of the mountain, <q>Pray accept our offering!
The spirits are victorious! The devils are defeated!</q><note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Himalayas</hi>
(Westminster, 1899), pp. 115, 188.</note>
Indians of Guatemala offered, according to their means, a
little cotton, salt, cacao, or chili.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>, ii. 564.</note> They now burn copal
and sometimes dance on the tops of the passes where the
cairns are to be seen, but perhaps these devotions may be
paid to the crosses which at the present day are generally
set up in such situations.<note place='foot'>C. Sapper, <q>Die Gebräuche und
religiösen Anschauungen der Kekchí-Indianer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, viii. (1895) pp. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Indian of Bolivia will
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
squirt out the juice of his coca-quid, or throw the quid itself
on the cairn, to which he adds a stone; occasionally he
goes so far as to stick feathers or a leathern sandal or two
on the pile. In passing the cairns he will sometimes pull a
hair or two out of his eyebrows or eyelashes and puff them
away towards the sun.<note place='foot'>D. Forbes, <q>On the Aymara
Indians of Bolivia and Peru,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Ethnological Society of London</hi>,
ii. (1870) pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. C. Musters,
<q>Notes on Bolivia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Geographical Society</hi>, xlvii.
(1877) p. 211; Baron E. Nordenskiöld,
<q>Travels on the Boundaries of
Bolivia and Argentina,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Geographical
Journal</hi>, xxi. (1903) p. 518.</note> Peruvian Indians used similarly to
make cheap offerings of chewed coca or maize, old shoes,
and so forth, on the cairns.<note place='foot'>P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de
la Idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621), pp.
37, 130.</note> In Sweden and Corea a little
money is sometimes thrown on a cairn instead of a stick
or stone.<note place='foot'>F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, p.
274; Brett, <q>Dans la Corée Septentrionale,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxxi. (1899) p. 237.</note> The shrine of the Jungle Mother in Northern
India is usually a pile of stones and branches to which
every passer-by contributes. When she is displeased, she
lets a tiger or leopard kill her negligent votary. She is the
great goddess of the herdsmen and other dwellers in the
forest, and they vow to her a cock and a goat, or a young
pig, if she saves them and their cattle from beasts of prey.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 115. <q>In some parts
of Bilaspore there may be seen heaps
of stones, which are known as <foreign rend='italic'>kuriyā</foreign>,
from the word <foreign rend='italic'>kurhonā</foreign>, meaning to
heap or pile-up. Just how and why
the practice was started the people
cannot explain; but to this day every
one who passes a <foreign rend='italic'>kuriyā</foreign> will take up
a stone and throw it on the pile.
This, they say, has been done as long
as they can remember</q> (E. M. Gordon,
<hi rend='italic'>Indian Folk Tales</hi>, London, 1908, p.
14).</note>
In the jungles of Mirzapur the cairn which marks the spot
where a man has been killed by a tiger, and to which each
passer-by contributes a stone, is commonly in charge of a
Baiga or aboriginal priest, who offers upon it a cock, a pig,
or some spirits, and occasionally lights a little lamp at the
shrine.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Baganda members of the Bean clan
worshipped the spirit of the river Nakiza. <q>There was no
temple, but they had two large heaps of sticks and grass,
one on either side of the river by the ford; to these heaps
the members went, when they wished to make an offering to
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
the spirit, or to seek his assistance. The offerings were
usually goats, beer, barkcloth, and fowls. When people
crossed the river they threw a little grass or some sticks on
to the heap before crossing, and again a little more on to
the second heap after crossing; this was their offering to the
spirit for a safe crossing.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 163.</note> There is a ford on the Calabar
river in West Africa which has an ill repute, for the stream
is broad, the current rapid, and there are crocodiles in the
deep places. Beside the ford is a large oval-shaped stone
which the Ekoi regard as an altar of Nimm, a powerful
goddess, who dwells in the depth of the river Kwa and
manifests herself in the likeness now of a crocodile and now
of a snake. In order to ensure a safe passage through the
river it is customary to pluck a leaf, rub it on the forehead
over the pineal gland, and throw it on a heap of leaves in
front of the stone. As he rubs the leaf on his forehead, the
person who is about to plunge into the river prays, <q>May I
be free from danger! May I go through the water to the
other side! May I see no evil!</q> And when he throws the
leaf on the heap he prays again, saying, <q>I am coming
across the river, may the crocodile lay down his head!</q><note place='foot'>P. Amaury Talbot, <hi rend='italic'>In the Shadow
of the Bush</hi> (London, 1912), p. 242.
As to the goddess Nimm, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp.
2 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Here the leaves appear to be a propitiatory offering presented
to the dread goddess in the hope that she will suffer her
worshipper to pass the ford unmolested. At another but
smaller stream, called the River of Good Fortune, the Ekoi
similarly rub leaves on their foreheads, praying for luck, and
throw them on a heap before they pass through the water.
They think that he who complies with this custom will have
good luck throughout the year. Again, when the Ekoi kill
a chameleon on the road, they do not throw the body away
in the forest, but lay it by the wayside, and all who pass by
pluck a few leaves and drop them on the dead animal,
saying, <q>Look! Here is your mat.</q> In this way heaps of
leaves accumulate over the carcases of chameleons. The
custom is intended to appease the shade of the chameleon,
who, if he were not pacified, would go to the Earth-god
Obassi Nsi and pray for vengeance on the race of those who
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
had caused his death.<note place='foot'>P. Amaury Talbot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 91.</note> The Washamba of German East
Africa believe that certain stony and dangerous places in the
paths are the abodes of spirits; hence at any such spot a
traveller who would have a prosperous journey must dance a
little and deposit a few small stones.<note place='foot'>A. Karasek, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Waschambaa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Baessler-Archiv</hi>,
i. (1911) p. 194.</note> The dance and the
stones are presumably intended to soften the heart of the
spirits and induce them to look favourably on the dancer.
In Papa Westray, one of the Orkney Islands, there is a
ruined chapel called St. Tredwels, <q>at the door of which
there is a heap of stones; which was the superstition of the
common people, who have such a veneration for this chapel
above any other, that they never fail, at their coming to it, to
throw a stone as an offering before the door: and this they
reckon an indispensable duty enjoined by their ancestors.</q><note place='foot'>M. Martin, <q>A Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in John
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>
(London, 1808-1814), iii. 691.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
throwing of
stones and
sticks is
sometimes
accompanied
by
prayers. Gradual
transformation
of
an old
magical
ceremony
into a religious
rite.</note>
Prayers, too, as we have seen, are sometimes offered
at these piles. In Laos heaps of stones may be seen
beside the path, on which the passenger will deposit a
pebble, a branch, or a leaf, while he beseeches the Lord
of the Diamond to bestow on him good luck and long
life.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>
(Saigon, 1885), p. 198.</note> In the Himalayan districts of the North-Western
Provinces of India heaps of stones and sticks are often
to be seen on hills or at cross-roads. They are formed
by the contributions of passing travellers, each of whom
in adding his stone or stick to the pile prays, saying,
<q>Thou goddess whose home is on the ridge, eater of wood
and stone, preserve me.</q><note place='foot'>E. T. Atkinson, <hi rend='italic'>The Himalayan
Districts of the North-Western Provinces
of India</hi>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884)
p. 832.</note> Tibetan travellers mutter a
prayer at the cairns on the tops of passes to which they add
a few stones gathered by them on the ascent.<note place='foot'>T. T. Cooper, <hi rend='italic'>Travels of a Pioneer
of Commerce</hi> (London, 1871), p. 275.
Compare W. W. Rockhill, <hi rend='italic'>The Land
of the Lamas</hi> (London, 1891), pp.
126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A native of
South-Eastern Africa who places a small stone on a cairn is
wont to say as he does so, <q>Cairn, grant me strength and
prosperity.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <q>Manners,
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions
of South African Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xx. (1891)
p. 126.</note> In the same circumstances the Hottentot
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
prays for plenty of cattle,<note place='foot'>Sir James E. Alexander, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition
of Discovery into the Interior of
Africa</hi> (London, 1838), i. 166.</note> and the Caffre that his journey
may be prosperous, that he may have strength to accomplish
it, and that he may obtain an abundant supply of food by
the way.<note place='foot'>S. Kay, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches in
Caffraria</hi> (London, 1833), pp. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
When the Bishop of Capetown once
passed a heap of stones on the top of
a mountain in the Amapondo country
he was told that <q>it was customary
for every traveller to add one to the
heap that it might have a favourable
influence on his journey, and enable
him to arrive at some kraal while the
pot is yet boiling</q> (J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The
Kaffirs of Natal</hi>, London, 1857, p.
217). Here there is no mention of
a prayer. Similarly a Basuto on a
journey, when he fears that the friend
with whom he is going to stay may
have eaten up all the food before his
guest's arrival, places a stone on a
cairn to avert the danger (E. Casalis,
<hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, London, 1861, p. 272).
The reason alleged for the practice in
these cases is perhaps equivalent to
the one assigned by the Melanesians
and others; by ridding the traveller of
his fatigue it enables him to journey
faster and so to reach his destination
before supper is over. But sometimes
a travelling Mowenda will place a
stone, not on a cairn, but in the fork
of a tree, saying, <q>May the sun not set
before I reach my destination.</q> See
Rev. E. Gottschling, <q>The Bawenda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) p. 381. This last
custom is a charm to prevent the sun
from setting. See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and
the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 318. In
Senegal the custom of throwing stones
on cairns by the wayside is said to be
observed <q>in order to ensure a speedy
and prosperous return.</q> See Dr. Bellamy,
<q>Notes ethnographiques recueillies
dans le Haut-Sénégal,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d' Ethnographie</hi>, v. (1886) p. 83. In the
Fan country of West Africa the custom
of adding a leafy branch to a heap of
such branches in the forest was explained
by a native, who said that it
was done to prevent the trees and
branches from falling on the traveller's
head, and their roots from wounding
his feet. See Father Trilles, <q>Mille
lieues dans l'inconnu,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xxxiv. (1902) p. 142.</note> It is said that sick Bushmen used to go on
pilgrimage to the cairn called the Devil's Neck, and pray to
the spirit of the place to heal them, while they rubbed the
sick part of their body and cried, <q>Woe! woe!</q> On
special occasions, too, they resorted thither and implored
the spirit's help.<note place='foot'>Th. Hahn, <q>Die Buschmänner,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, xviii. 141. As to the cairn in
question, see above, p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>.</note> Such customs seem to indicate the
gradual transformation of an old magical ceremony into
a religious rite with its characteristic features of prayer and
sacrifice. Yet behind these later accretions, as we may
perhaps regard them, it seems possible in many, if not in
all, cases to discern the nucleus to which they have attached
themselves, the original idea which they tend to conceal
and in time to transmute. That idea is the transference of
evil from man to a material substance which he can cast
from him like an outworn garment.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Transference to Animals.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Transference to Animals.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils
transferred
to animals
in Africa.</note>
Animals are often employed as a vehicle for carrying
away or transferring the evil. A Guinea negro who happens
to be unwell will sometimes tie a live chicken round his neck,
so that it lies on his breast. When the bird flaps its wings
or cheeps the man thinks it a good sign, supposing the
chicken to be afflicted with the very pain from which he
hopes soon to be released, or which he would otherwise have
to endure.<note place='foot'>J. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Trade and Travels in
the Gulph of Guinea</hi> (London, 1851),
p. 77.</note> When a Moor has a headache he will sometimes
take a lamb or a goat and beat it till it falls down, believing
that the headache will thus be transferred to the animal.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de
l'Afrique</hi> (Amsterdam, 1686), p.
117.</note> In
Morocco most wealthy Moors keep a wild boar in their
stables, in order that the jinn and evil spirits may be
diverted from the horses and enter into the boar.<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>
(London, 1876), p. 301. Compare
E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908),
p. 454.</note> In some
parts of Algeria people think that typhoid fever can be cured
by taking a tortoise, putting it on its back in the road, and
covering it over with a pot. The patient recovers, but whoever
upsets the pot catches the fever. In Tlemcen a pregnant
woman is protected against jinn by means of a black fowl
which is kept in the house from the seventh month of her
pregnancy till her delivery. Finally, the oldest woman in
the house releases the fowl in the Jews' quarter; the bird is
supposed to carry the jinn away with it.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 454 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the
Caffres of South Africa, when other remedies have failed,
<q>natives sometimes adopt the custom of taking a goat into
the presence of a sick man, and confess the sins of the kraal
over the animal. Sometimes a few drops of blood from the
sick man are allowed to fall on the head of the goat, which
is turned out into an uninhabited part of the veldt. The
sickness is supposed to be transferred to the animal, and to
become lost in the desert.</q><note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential
Kafir</hi> (London, 1904), p. 261.</note> After an illness a Bechuana
king seated himself upon an ox which lay stretched on the
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
ground. The native doctor next poured water on the king's
head till it ran down over his body. Then the head of the
ox was held in a vessel of water till the animal expired;
whereupon the doctor declared, and the people believed,
that the ox died of the king's disease, which had been transferred
from him to it.<note place='foot'>Rev. John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in
South Africa</hi> (London, 1822), ii. 207
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Baganda of Central Africa also
attempted to transfer illness from a person to an animal.
<q>The medicine-man would take the animal, pass some herbs
over the sick man, tie these to the animal, and then drive it
away to some waste land, where he would kill it, taking the
meat as his perquisite. The sick man would be expected to
recover.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Akikuyu of East Africa think that a man
can transfer the guilt of incest by means of <q>an ignoble
ceremony</q> to a goat, which is then killed; this saves the
life of the culprit, who otherwise must die.<note place='foot'>P. Cayzac, <q>La religion des
Kikuyu,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, v. (1910) p.
311.</note> When disease
breaks out among the cattle of the Bahima, a pastoral people
of Central Africa, the priest <q>collects herbs and other
remedies to attract the disease from the cattle. An animal
is chosen from the herd in the evening, which is to be the
scapegoat for the herd; the herbs, etc., are tied round its
neck, with certain fetiches to ensure the illness leaving the
other animals; the cow is driven round the outside of the
kraal several times, and afterwards placed inside with the
herd for the night. Early the following morning the animal
is taken out and again driven round the kraal; the priest
then kills it in the gateway, and some of the blood is
sprinkled over the people belonging to the kraal, and also
over the herd. The people next file out, each one jumping
over the carcase of the cow, and all the animals are driven
over it in the same way. The disease is thus transferred to
the scapegoat and the herd is saved. All the fetiches and
herbs, which were upon the scapegoat, are fastened upon the
door-posts and lintel of the kraal to prevent the disease from
entering again.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>The Bahima, a
Cow Tribe of Enkole,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvii.
(1907) p. 111.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils
transferred
to animals
in various
parts of
the world.</note>
When the cattle of the Huzuls, a pastoral people of the
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
Carpathians, are sick and the owner attributes the sickness
to witchcraft, he throws glowing coals into a vessel of
water and then pours the water on a black dog; thus
the sickness passes into the dog and the cattle are made
whole.<note place='foot'>Dr. R. F. Kaindl, <q>Zauberglaube
bei den Huzulen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxvi. (1899) p. 254.</note> In Arabia, when the plague is raging, the people
will sometimes lead a camel through all the quarters of
the town in order that the animal may take the pestilence
on itself. Then they strangle it in a sacred place and
imagine that they have rid themselves of the camel and of
the plague at one blow.<note place='foot'>J. Goldziher, <hi rend='italic'>Muhammedanische
Studien</hi> (Halle a. S., 1888-1890), i.
34.</note> In Annam, when sickness is
caused by the presence of a demon in the body of the
sufferer, a skilful exorcist will decoy the unwary devil into
a fowl and then, quick as thought, decapitate the bird and
throw it out of the door. But lest the fiend should survive
this severe operation, cabalistic figures are posted on the
outside of the door, which preclude him from entering the
premises and assaulting the patient afresh.<note place='foot'>E. Diguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Annamites</hi> (Paris,
1906), pp. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is said that
when smallpox is raging the savages of Formosa will drive the
demon of disease into a sow, then cut off the animal's ears
and burn them or it, believing that in this way they rid themselves
of the plague.<note place='foot'>W. Müller, <q>Über die Wildenstämme
der Insel Formosa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xlii. (1910) p. 237.
The writer's use of the pronoun (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>sie</foreign>) is
ambiguous.</note> When a Kabyle child is pining for
jealousy of a younger brother or sister, the parents imagine
that they can cure it as follows. They take fifteen grains of
wheat, wrap them up in a packet, and leave the packet all
night under the head of the jealous child. Then in the
morning they throw the grains into an ant-hill, saying,
<q>Salutation to you, oh beautiful beings clad in black;
salutation to you who dig the earth so well without the aid
of any hoe by the help of God and the angels! May each
of you take his share of the jealousy attached to these
grains!</q><note place='foot'>Father E. Amat, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de
la Propagation de la Foi</hi>, lxx. (1898)
pp. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Vehicles
for the
transference
of
evils in
Madagascar.</note>
Amongst the Malagasy the vehicle for carrying away
evils is called a <foreign rend='italic'>faditra</foreign>. <q>The faditra is anything selected
by the sikidy [divining board] for the purpose of taking
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
away any hurtful evils or diseases that might prove injurious
to an individual's happiness, peace, or prosperity. The
faditra may be either ashes, cut money, a sheep, a pumpkin,
or anything else the sikidy may choose to direct. After the
particular article is appointed, the priest counts upon it all
the evils that may prove injurious to the person for whom it
is made, and which he then charges the faditra to take away
for ever. If the faditra be ashes, it is blown, to be carried
away by the wind. If it be cut money, it is thrown to the
bottom of deep water, or where it can never be found. If it
be a sheep, it is carried away to a distance on the shoulders
of a man, who runs with all his might, mumbling as he goes,
as if in the greatest rage against the faditra, for the evils it
is bearing away. If it be a pumpkin, it is carried on the
shoulders to a little distance, and there dashed upon the
ground with every appearance of fury and indignation.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of Madagascar</hi>
(London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), i. 422 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 232, 435, 436 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Rev. J. Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African
Island</hi> (London, 1880), pp. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
As to divination by the <foreign rend='italic'>sikidy</foreign>, see
J. Sibree, <q>Divination among the
Malagasy,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iii. (1892) pp.
193-226.</note> A
Malagasy was informed by a diviner that he was doomed to
a bloody death, but that possibly he might avert his fate by
performing a certain rite. Carrying a small vessel full of
blood upon his head, he was to mount upon the back of a
bullock; while thus mounted, he was to spill the blood upon
the bullock's head, and then send the animal away into the
wilderness, whence it might never return.<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 374; J. Sibree,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great African Island</hi>, p. 304;
J. Cameron, in <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual
and Madagascar Magazine, Reprint of
the First Four Numbers</hi> (Antananarivo,
1885), p. 263.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Extraction
of kleptomania
by
spiders
and crabs. Evils
transferred
to birds,
which fly
away with
them.</note>
Among the Toradjas of Central Celebes a chief's daughter,
who suffered from kleptomania, was healed by a wise woman,
who placed a bag containing spiders and crabs on the patient's
hands. The physician calculated that the prehensile claws
of these creatures, so suggestive of a thief's hands in the act
of closing on his prey, would lay hold of the vicious propensity
in the young woman's mind and extract it as neatly
as a pair of forceps nips out a thorn from the flesh.<note place='foot'>N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt,
<hi rend='italic'>De Bare'e-sprekende Toradja's van
Midden-Celebes</hi>, i. (Batavia, 1912) p.
399.</note>
The Battas of Sumatra have a ceremony which they call
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
<q>making the curse to fly away.</q> When a woman is childless,
a sacrifice is offered to the gods of three grasshoppers,
representing a head of cattle, a buffalo, and a horse. Then
a swallow is set free, with a prayer that the curse may fall
upon the bird and fly away with it.<note place='foot'>W. Ködding, <q>Die Batakschen
Götter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xii. (1885) p. 478; Dr. R.
Römer, <q>Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst
der Karo-Batak's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, l.
(1908) p. 223.</note> <q>The entrance into a
house of an animal which does not generally seek to share
the abode of man is regarded by the Malays as ominous of
misfortune. If a wild bird flies into a house, it must be
carefully caught and smeared with oil, and must then be
released in the open air, a formula being recited in which it
is bidden to fly away with all the ill-luck and misfortunes
(<foreign rend='italic'>sial jambalang</foreign>) of the occupier.</q><note place='foot'>W. E. Maxwell, <q>The Folklore
of the Malays,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>,
No. 7 (June, 1881), p. 27; W. W.
Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi> (London, 1900),
pp. 534 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In antiquity Greek
women seem to have done the same with swallows which
they caught in the house: they poured oil on them and let
them fly away, apparently for the purpose of removing ill-luck
from the household.<note place='foot'>Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> liii. vol.
ii. pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic,
1857). Compare Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi>, iii.
9, p. 398 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, who ironically proposes to
dismiss poets from his ideal state in
the same manner. These passages of
Plato and Dio Chrysostom were pointed
out to me by my friend Professor Henry
Jackson. There was a Greek saying,
attributed to Pythagoras, that swallows
should not be allowed to enter a house
(Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> viii. 7, 1).</note> The Huzuls of the Carpathians
imagine that they can transfer freckles to the first swallow
they see in spring by washing their face in flowing water and
saying, <q>Swallow, swallow, take my freckles, and give me
rosy cheeks.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. R. F. Kaindl, <q>Zauberglaube
bei den Huzulen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi. (1899)
pp. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At the cleansing of a leper and of a house
suspected of being tainted with leprosy among the Hebrews
the priest used to let a living bird fly away into the open
field,<note place='foot'>Leviticus xiv. 7, 53.</note> no doubt in order to carry away the leprosy with it.
Similarly among the ancient Arabs a widow was expected
to live secluded in a small tent for a year after her husband's
death; then a bird or a sheep was brought to her, she made
the creature touch her person, and let it go. It was believed
that the bird or the sheep would not live long thereafter;
doubtless it was supposed to suffer from the uncleanness
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
or taint of death which the widow had transferred
to it.<note place='foot'>J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste arabischen
Heidentumes</hi> (Berlin, 1887), p. 156;
W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Semites</hi>, New Edition (London, 1894),
pp. 422, 428.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils
transferred
to animals
in India.</note>
Among the Majhwar, a Dravidian race of South
Mirzapur, if a man has died of a contagious disease, such as
cholera, the village priest walks in front of the funeral procession
with a chicken in his hands, which he lets loose in
the direction of some other village as a scapegoat to carry
the infection away. None but another very experienced
priest would afterwards dare to touch or eat such a chicken.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of
the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</hi>
(Calcutta, 1896), iii. 434.</note>
Among the Badagas of the Neilgherry Hills in Southern
India, when a death has taken place, the sins of the deceased
are laid upon a buffalo calf. For this purpose the people
gather round the corpse and carry it outside of the village.
There an elder of the tribe, standing at the head of the
corpse, recites or chants a long list of sins such as any
Badaga may commit, and the people repeat the last words of
each line after him. The confession of sins is thrice repeated.
<q>By a conventional mode of expression, the sum total of
sins a man may do is said to be thirteen hundred. Admitting
that the deceased has committed them all, the performer
cries aloud, <q>Stay not their flight to God's pure feet.</q> As
he closes, the whole assembly chants aloud <q>Stay not their
flight.</q> Again the performer enters into details, and cries,
<q>He killed the crawling snake. It is a sin.</q> In a moment
the last word is caught up, and all the people cry <q>It is a
sin.</q> As they shout, the performer lays his hand upon the
calf. The sin is transferred to the calf. Thus the whole
catalogue is gone through in this impressive way. But this
is not enough. As the last shout <q>Let all be well</q> dies
away, the performer gives place to another, and again confession
is made, and all the people shout <q>It is a sin.</q> A
third time it is done. Then, still in solemn silence, the calf
is let loose. Like the Jewish scapegoat, it may never be
used for secular work.</q> At a Badaga funeral witnessed by
the Rev. A. C. Clayton the buffalo calf was led thrice round
the bier, and the dead man's hand was laid on its head.
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
<q>By this act, the calf was supposed to receive all the sins of
the deceased. It was then driven away to a great distance,
that it might contaminate no one, and it was said that it
would never be sold, but looked on as a dedicated sacred
animal.</q><note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes of
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), i. 113-117;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes in
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1906), pp.
192-196; Captain H. Harkness,
<hi rend='italic'>Description of a Singular Aboriginal
Race inhabiting the Summit of the
Neilgherry Hills</hi> (London, 1832), p.
133; F. Metz, <hi rend='italic'>The Tribes inhabiting
the Neilgherry Hills</hi>, Second Edition
(Mangalore, 1864), p. 78; Jagor,
<q>Ueber die Badagas im Nilgiri-Gebirge,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</hi> (1876),
pp. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> At the Badaga funerals
witnessed by Mr. E. Thurston <q>no
calf was brought near the corpse, and
the celebrants of the rites were satisfied
with the mere mention by name of a
calf, which is male or female according
to the sex of the deceased.</q></note> <q>The idea of this ceremony is, that the sins of
the deceased enter the calf, or that the task of his absolution
is laid on it. They say that the calf very soon disappears,
and that it is never after heard of.</q><note place='foot'>H. Harkness, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Some of the Todas of
the Neilgherry Hills in like manner let loose a calf as a
funeral ceremony; the intention may be to transfer the sins
of the deceased to the animal. Perhaps the Todas have
borrowed the ceremony from the Badagas.<note place='foot'>J. W. Breeks, <hi rend='italic'>An Account of the
Primitive Tribes and Monuments of
the Nīlagiris</hi> (London, 1873), pp. 23
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi> (London,
1906), pp. 376 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Kumaon,
a district of North-Western India, the custom of letting loose
a bullock as a scapegoat at a funeral is occasionally observed.
A bell is hung on the bullock's neck, and bells are tied to its
feet, and the animal is told that it is to be let go in order to
save the spirit of the deceased from the torments of hell.
Sometimes the bullock's right quarter is branded with a
trident and the left with a discus.<note place='foot'>E. T. Atkinson, <hi rend='italic'>The Himalayan
Districts of the North-Western Provinces
of India</hi>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) pp.
927 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In other parts of North-Western
India on the eleventh day after
a death a bull calf is let loose with a
trident branded on its shoulder or
quarter <q>to become a pest.</q> See (Sir)
Denzil C. J. Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the
Revision of Settlement of the Panipat
Tahsil and Karnal Parganah of the
Karnal District</hi> (Allahabad, 1883), p.
137. In Behar, a district of Bengal,
a bullock is also let loose on the eleventh
day of mourning for a near relative.
See G. A. Grierson, <hi rend='italic'>Bihār Peasant
Life</hi> (Calcutta, 1885), p. 409.</note> Perhaps the original
intention of such customs was to banish the contagion of
death by means of the animal, which carried it away and so
ensured the life of the survivors. The idea of sin is not
primitive.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. The Transference to Men.'/>
<head>§ 4. The Transference to Men.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils
transferred
to human
beings in
India and
elsewhere.</note>
Again, men sometimes play the part of scapegoat by
diverting to themselves the evils that threaten others. An
ancient Hindoo ritual describes how the pangs of thirst may
be transferred from a sick man to another. The operator
seats the pair on branches, back to back, the sufferer with
his face to the east, and the whole man with his face to the
west. Then he stirs some gruel in a vessel placed on the
patient's head and hands the stir-about to the other man to
drink. In this way he transfers the pangs of thirst from
the thirsty soul to the other, who obligingly receives them in
his stead.<note place='foot'>W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches Zauberritual</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1900), p. 83;
<hi rend='italic'>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</hi>, translated
by Maurice Bloomfield (Oxford,
1897), pp. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of
the East</hi>, vol. xlii.).</note> There is a painful Telugu remedy for a fever:
it is to embrace a bald-headed Brahman widow at the earliest
streak of dawn. By doing so you get rid of the fever, and no
doubt (though this is not expressly affirmed) you at the same
time transfer it to the bald-headed widow.<note place='foot'>M. N. Venketswami, <q>Telugu
Superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xxiv. (1895) p. 359.</note> When a Cinghalese
is dangerously ill, and the physicians can do nothing,
a devil-dancer is called in, who by making offerings to the
devils, and dancing in the masks appropriate to them, conjures
these demons of disease, one after the other, out of the sick
man's body and into his own. Having thus successfully extracted
the cause of the malady, the artful dancer lies down
on a bier, and shamming death, is carried to an open place
outside the village. Here, being left to himself, he soon
comes to life again, and hastens back to claim his reward.<note place='foot'>A. Grünwedel, <q>Sinhalesische
Masken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, vi. (1893) pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In 1590 a Scotch witch of the name of Agnes Sampson
was convicted of curing a certain Robert Kers of a disease
<q>laid upon him by a westland warlock when he was at
Dumfries, whilk sickness she took upon herself, and kept the
same with great groaning and torment till the morn, at whilk
time there was a great din heard in the house.</q> The noise
was made by the witch in her efforts to shift the disease, by
means of clothes, from herself to a cat or dog. Unfortunately
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
the attempt partly miscarried. The disease missed the animal
and hit Alexander Douglas of Dalkeith, who dwined and
died of it, while the original patient, Robert Kers, was made
whole.<note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>Darker Superstitions
of Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh, 1834), pp. 104
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> I have modernised the spelling.</note> The Dyaks believe that certain men possess in
themselves the power of neutralizing bad omens. So, when
evil omens have alarmed a farmer for the safety of his crops,
he takes a small portion of his farm produce to one of these
wise men, who eats it raw for a small consideration, <q>and
thereby appropriates to himself the evil omen, which in him
becomes innocuous, and thus delivers the other from the ban
of the <foreign rend='italic'>pemali</foreign> or taboo.</q><note place='foot'>J. Perham, <q>Sea Dyak Religion,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 10 (December
1882), p. 232.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sins and
misfortunes
transferred
to human
scapegoats
in
New
Zealand
and
Manipur.
Annual
eponyms in
Manipur. Eponymous
magistrates
as public
scapegoats.</note>
<q>In one part of New Zealand an expiation for sin
was felt to be necessary; a service was performed over
an individual, by which all the sins of the tribe were
supposed to be transferred to him, a fern stalk was
previously tied to his person, with which he jumped into
the river, and there unbinding, allowed it to float away to
the sea, bearing their sins with it.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Richard Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika A
Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,
Second Edition (London,
1870), p. 101.</note> In great emergencies
the sins of the Rajah of Manipur used to be transferred
to somebody else, usually to a criminal, who earned his
pardon by his vicarious sufferings. To effect the transference
the Rajah and his wife, clad in fine robes, bathed
on a scaffold erected in the bazaar, while the criminal
crouched beneath it. With the water which dripped
from them on him their sins also were washed away and fell
on the human scapegoat. To complete the transference the
Rajah and his wife made over their fine robes to their
substitute, while they themselves, clad in new raiment, mixed
with the people till evening. But at the close of the day
they entered into retreat and remained in seclusion for about
a week, during which they were esteemed sacred or tabooed.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <q>The Native Tribes
of Manipur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901) p. 302;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Meitheis</hi> (London, 1908), pp.
106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Further, in Manipur <q>they have a noteworthy system of
keeping count of the years. Each year is named after some
man, who&mdash;for a consideration&mdash;undertakes to bear the fortune
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
good or bad of the year. If the year be good, if there
be no pestilence and a good harvest, he gets presents from
all sorts of people, and I remember hearing that in 1898,
when the cholera was at its worst, a deputation came to the
Political Agent and asked him to punish the name-giver, as
it was obvious that he was responsible for the epidemic. In
former times he would have got into trouble.</q><note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <q>The Native Tribes
of Manipur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901) p. 302.</note> The nomination
of the eponym, or man who is to give his name to the
year, takes place at a festival called <foreign rend='italic'>Chirouba</foreign>, which falls
about the middle of April. It is the priests who nominate
the eponym, after comparing his horoscope with that of the
Rajah and of the State generally. The retiring official, who
gave his name to the past year, addresses his successor as
follows: <q>My friend, I bore and took away all evil spirits
and sins from the Rajah and his people during the last year.
Do thou likewise from to-morrow until the next <foreign rend='italic'>Chirouba</foreign>.</q>
Then the incoming official, who is to give his name to the
New Year, addresses the Rajah in these words: <q>O son of
heaven, Ruler of the Kings, great and ancient Lord, Incarnation
of God, the great Lord Pakhangba, Master of the
bright Sun, Lord of the Plain and Despot of the Hills,
whose kingdom is from the hills on the east to the mountains
on the west, the old year perishes, the new cometh.
New is the sun of the new year, and bright as the new sun
shalt thou be, and mild withal as the moon. May thy beauty
and thy strength grow with the growth of the new year.
From to-day will I bear on my head all thy sins, diseases,
misfortunes, shame, mischief, all that is aimed in battle
against thee, all that threatens thee, all that is bad and hurtful
for thee and thy kingdom.</q> For these important services
the eponym or vicar receives from the Rajah a number of
gifts, including a basket of salt, and his grateful country
rewards his self-sacrificing devotion by bestowing many
privileges on him.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <hi rend='italic'>The Meitheis</hi> (London,
1908), pp. 104-106.</note> Elsewhere, perhaps, if we knew more
about the matter, we might find that eponymous magistrates
who give their names to the year have been similarly
regarded as public scapegoats, who bore on their devoted
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
heads the misfortunes, the sins, and the sorrows of the
whole people.<note place='foot'>Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Indian
story of the
transference
of sins to a
holy man.</note>
In the <foreign rend='italic'>Jataka</foreign>, or collection of Indian stories which
narrate the many transmigrations of the Buddha, there is an
instructive tale, which sets forth how sins and misfortunes
can be transferred by means of spittle to a holy ascetic. A
lady of easy virtue, we are told, had lost the favour of King
Dandaki and bethought herself how she could recover it.
As she walked in the park revolving these things in her
mind, she spied a devout ascetic named Kisavaccha. A
thought struck her. <q>Surely,</q> said she to herself, <q>this
must be Ill Luck. I will get rid of my sin on his person
and then go and bathe.</q> No sooner said than done.
Chewing her toothpick, she collected a large clot of spittle
in her mouth with which she beslavered the matted locks of
the venerable man, and having hurled her toothpick at his
head into the bargain she departed with a mind at peace
and bathed. The stratagem was entirely successful; for the
king took her into his good graces again. Not long after
it chanced that the king deposed his domestic chaplain from
his office. Naturally chagrined at this loss of royal favour,
the clergyman repaired to the king's light o' love and
enquired how she had contrived to recapture the monarch's
affection. She told him frankly how she had got rid of
her sin and emerged without a stain on her character by
simply spitting on the head of Ill Luck in the royal park.
The chaplain took the hint, and hastening to the park
bespattered in like manner the sacred locks of the holy
man; and in consequence he was soon reinstated in office.
It would have been well if the thing had stopped there, but
unfortunately it did not. By and bye it happened that
there was a disturbance on the king's frontier, and the king
put himself at the head of his army to go forth and fight.
An unhappy idea occurred to his domestic chaplain. Elated
by the success of the expedient which had restored him to
royal favour, he asked the king, <q>Sire, do you wish for
victory or defeat?</q> <q>Why for victory, of course,</q> replied
the king. <q>Then you take my advice,</q> said the chaplain;
<q>just go and spit on the head of Ill Luck, who dwells in the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
royal park; you will thus transfer all your sin to his person.</q>
It seemed to the king a capital idea and he improved on it
by proposing that the whole army should accompany him
and get rid of their sins in like manner. They all did so,
beginning with the king, and the state of the holy man's
head when they had all done is something frightful to contemplate.
But even this was not the worst. For after the
king had gone, up came the commander-in-chief and seeing
the sad plight of the pious ascetic, he took pity on him and
had his poor bedabbled hair thoroughly washed. The fatal
consequences of this kindly-meant but most injudicious
shampoo may easily be anticipated. The sins which had
been transferred with the saliva to the person of the devotee
were now restored to their respective owners; and to punish
them for their guilt fire fell from heaven and destroyed the
whole kingdom for sixty leagues round about.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Jataha or Stories of the
Buddha's former Births</hi>, vol. v., translated
by H. T. Francis (Cambridge, 1905), pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of evils to
human
scapegoats
in Uganda.</note>
A less harmless way of relieving an army from guilt or
misfortune used in former times to be actually practised by
the Baganda. When an army had returned from war, and
the gods warned the king by their oracles that some evil
had attached itself to the soldiers, it was customary to pick
out a woman slave from the captives, together with a cow,
a goat, a fowl, and a dog from the booty, and to send them
back under a strong guard to the borders of the country
from which they had come. There their limbs were broken
and they were left to die; for they were too crippled to
crawl back to Uganda. In order to ensure the transference
of the evil to these substitutes, bunches of grass were rubbed
over the people and cattle and then tied to the victims.
After that the army was pronounced clean and was allowed
to return to the capital. A similar mode of transferring
evil to human and animal victims was practised by the
Baganda whenever the gods warned the king that his
hereditary foes the Banyoro were working magic against
him and his people.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 342.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of sins to a
Brahman
in Travancore.
Transference
of sins to a
Sin-eater in
England.</note>
In Travancore, when a rajah is near his end, they seek
out a holy Brahman, who consents to take upon himself the
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
sins of the dying man in consideration of the sum of ten
thousand rupees. Thus prepared to immolate himself on the
altar of duty as a vicarious sacrifice for sin, the saint is introduced
into the chamber of death, and closely embraces the
dying rajah, saying to him, <q>O King, I undertake to bear
all your sins and diseases. May your Highness live long
and reign happily.</q> Having thus, with a noble devotion,
taken to himself the sins of the sufferer, and likewise the
rupees, he is sent away from the country and never more
allowed to return.<note place='foot'>Rev. S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>Native Life
in Travancore</hi> (London, 1883), p.
136.</note> Closely akin to this is the old Welsh
custom known as <q>sin-eating.</q> According to Aubrey, <q>In
the County of Hereford was an old Custome at funeralls to
hire poor people, who were to take upon them all the sinnes
of the party deceased. One of them I remember lived in a
cottage on Rosse-high way. (He was a long, leane, ugly,
lamentable poor raskal.) The manner was that when the
Corps was brought out of the house and layd on the Biere;
a Loafe of bread was brought out, and delivered to the
Sinne-eater over the corps, as also a Mazar-bowle of maple
(Gossips bowle) full of beer, which he was to drinke up, and
sixpence in money, in consideration whereof he took upon
him (ipso facto) all the Sinnes of the Defunct, and freed him
(or her) from walking after they were dead.... This
Custome (though rarely used in our dayes) yet by some
people was observed even in the strictest time of ye Presbyterian
government: as at Dynder, volens nolens the Parson
of ye Parish, the kinred of a woman deceased there had this
ceremonie punctually performed according to her Will: and
also the like was donne at ye City of Hereford in these times,
when a woman kept many yeares before her death a Mazard-bowle
for the Sinne-eater; and the like in other places in
this Countie; as also in Brecon, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> at Llangors, where Mr.
Gwin the minister about 1640 could no hinder ye performing
of this ancient custome. I believe this custom was heretofore
used over all Wales.... In North Wales the Sinne-eaters
are frequently made use of; but there, instead of a
Bowle of Beere, they have a bowle of Milke.</q><note place='foot'>J. Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remaines of Gentilisme
and Judaisme</hi> (Folk-lore Society, London,
1881), pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
to a letter dated February 1, 1714-15, <q>within the memory
of our fathers, in Shropshire, in those villages adjoyning to
Wales, when a person dyed, there was notice given to an
old sire (for so they called him), who presently repaired
to the place where the deceased lay, and stood before the
door of the house, when some of the family came out and
furnished him with a cricket, on which he sat down facing
the door. Then they gave him a groat, which he put in his
pocket; a crust of bread, which he eat; and a full bowle of
ale, which he drank off at a draught. After this he got up
from the cricket and pronounced, with a composed gesture,
the ease and rest of the soul departed for which he would
pawn his own soul. This I had from the ingenious John
Aubrey, Esq.</q><note place='foot'>Bagford's letter in Leland's <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>,
i. 76, quoted by J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Bohn's
edition (London, 1882-1883).</note> In modern times some doubt has been
thrown on Aubrey's account of the custom.<note place='foot'>In <hi rend='italic'>The Academy</hi>, 13th Nov. 1875,
p. 505, Mr. D. Silvan Evans stated
that he knew of no such custom anywhere
in Wales; and the custom seems
to be now quite unknown in Shropshire.
See C. S. Burne and G. F.
Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1883), pp. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The practice,
however, is reported to have prevailed in a valley not far
from Llandebie to a recent period. An instance was said
to have occurred about sixty years ago.<note place='foot'>The authority for the statement is
a Mr. Moggridge, reported in <hi rend='italic'>Archaeologia
Cambrensis</hi>, second series, iii.
330. But Mr. Moggridge did not
speak from personal knowledge, and as
he appears to have taken it for granted
that the practice of placing bread and
salt upon the breast of a corpse was a
survival of the custom of <q>sin-eating,</q>
his evidence must be received with
caution. He repeated his statement, in
somewhat vaguer terms, at a meeting
of the Anthropological Institute, 14th
December 1875. See <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, v. (1876)
pp. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of sins to a
sin-eater
in India.</note>
Aubrey's statement is moreover supported by the analogy
of similar customs in India. When the Rajah of Tanjore
died in 1801, some of his bones and the bones of the two
wives, who were burned with his corpse, were ground to
powder and eaten, mixed with boiled rice, by twelve
Brahmans. It was believed that the sins of the deceased
passed into the bodies of the Brahmans, who were paid for
the service.<note place='foot'>J. A. Dubois, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des Peuples de
l'Inde</hi> (Paris, 1825), ii. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Brahman, resident in a village near Raipur,
stated that he had eaten food (rice and milk) out of the hand
of the dead Rajah of Bilaspur, and that in consequence he
had been placed on the throne for the space of a year. At
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
the end of the year he had been given presents and then
turned out of the territory and forbidden apparently to
return. He was an outcast among his fellows for having
eaten out of a dead man's hand.<note place='foot'>R. Richardson, in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes
and Queries</hi>, i. p. 86, § 674 (May,
1884).</note> A similar custom is
believed to obtain in the hill states about Kangra, and
to have given rise to a caste of <q>outcaste</q> Brahmans. At
the funeral of a Rani of Chamba rice and ghee were eaten out
of the hands of the corpse by a Brahman paid for the purpose.
Afterwards a stranger, who had been caught outside the
Chamba territory, was given the costly wrappings of the
corpse, then told to depart and never shew his face in the
country again.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. p. 86,
§ 674, ii. p. 93, § 559 (March, 1885).
Some of these customs have been
already referred to in a different connexion.
See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 154.
In Uganda the eldest son used to
perform a funeral ceremony, which
consisted in chewing some seeds which
he took with his lips from the hand of
his dead father; some of these seeds
he then blew over the corpse and the
rest over one of the childless widows
who thereafter became his wife. The
meaning of the ceremony is obscure.
The eldest son in Uganda never inherited
his father's property. See the
Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi> (London,
1911), p. 117.</note> In Oude when an infant was killed it used
to be buried in the room where it had been born. On the
thirteenth day afterwards the priest had to cook and eat his
food in that room. By doing so he was supposed to take
the whole sin upon himself and to cleanse the family from
it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. p.
179, § 745 (July, 1886).</note> At Utch Kurgan in Turkestan Mr. Schuyler saw an old
man who was said to get his living by taking on himself the
sins of the dead, and thenceforth devoting his life to prayer
for their souls.<note place='foot'>E. Schuyler, <hi rend='italic'>Turkistan</hi> (London,
1876), ii. 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of sins
in Tahiti.</note>
In Tahiti, where the bodies of chiefs and persons of rank
were embalmed and preserved above ground in special sheds
or houses erected for them, a priest was employed at the
funeral rites who bore the title of the <q>corpse-praying
priest.</q> His office was singular. When the house for the
dead had been prepared, and the corpse placed on the platform
or bier, the priest ordered a hole to be made in the
floor, near the foot of the platform. Over this he prayed to
the god by whom it was supposed that the soul of the
deceased had been called away. The purport of his prayer
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
was that all the dead man's sins, especially the one for which
his soul had been required of him, might be deposited there,
that they might not attach in any degree to the survivors,
and that the anger of the god might be appeased. He next
addressed the corpse, usually saying, <q>With you let the guilt
now remain.</q> The pillar or post of the corpse, as it was
called, was then planted in the hole, and the hole filled up.
As soon as the ceremony of depositing the sins in the hole
was over, all who had touched the body or the garments of
the deceased, which were buried or destroyed, fled precipitately
into the sea, to cleanse themselves from the pollution
which they had contracted by touching the corpse. They
also cast into the sea the garments they had worn while they
were performing the last offices to the dead. Having finished
their ablutions, they gathered a few pieces of coral from the
bottom of the sea, and returning with them to the house
addressed the corpse, saying, <q>With you may the pollution
be.</q> So saying they threw down the coral on the top of
the hole which had been dug to receive the sins and the
defilement of the dead.<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836),
i. 401 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In this instance the sins of the
departed, as well as the pollution which the primitive mind
commonly associates with death, are not borne by a living
person, but buried in a hole. Yet the fundamental idea&mdash;that
of the transference of sins&mdash;is the same in the Tahitian
as in the Welsh and Indian customs; whether the vehicle
or receptacle destined to catch and draw off the evil be a
person, an animal, or a thing, is for the purpose in hand
a matter of little moment.<note place='foot'>The Welsh custom of <q>sin-eating</q>
has been interpreted by Mr. E. S.
Hartland as a modification of an older
custom of eating the corpse. See his
article, <q>The Sin-eater,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iii.
(1892) 145-157; <hi rend='italic'>The Legend of Perseus</hi>,
ii. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, iii. p. ix. I cannot
think his interpretation probable or
borne out by the evidence. The
Badaga custom of transferring the sins
of the dead to a calf which is then let
loose and never used again (above, pp.
<ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), the Tahitian custom of burying
the sins of a person whose body is carefully
preserved by being embalmed, and
the Manipur and Travancore customs of
transferring the sins of a Rajah before his
death (pp. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) establish the
practice of transferring sins in cases
where there can be no question of eating
the corpse. The original intention of
such practices was perhaps not so much
to take away the sins of the deceased
as to rid the survivors of the dangerous
pollution of death. This comes out to
some extent in the Tahitian custom.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. The Transference of Evil in Europe.'/>
<head>§ 5. The Transference of Evil in Europe.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transference
of
evils in
ancient
Greece. The transference
of
warts. Transference
of
sickness in
Scotland,
Germany,
and
Austria.</note>
The examples of the transference of evil hitherto adduced
have been mostly drawn from the customs of savage or
barbarous peoples. But similar attempts to shift the burden
of disease, misfortune, and sin from one's self to another
person, or to an animal or thing, have been common also
among the civilized nations of Europe, both in ancient and
modern times. A Roman cure for fever was to pare the
patient's nails, and stick the parings with wax on a neighbour's
door before sunrise; the fever then passed from the
sick man to his neighbour.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 86.</note> Similar devices must have been
resorted to by the Greeks; for in laying down laws for his
ideal state, Plato thinks it too much to expect that men
should not be alarmed at finding certain wax figures adhering
to their doors or to the tombstones of their parents, or lying
at cross-roads.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi>, xi. 12, p. 933 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> Among the ruins of the great sanctuary of
Aesculapius, which were excavated not very long ago in an
open valley among the mountains of Epidaurus, inscriptions
have been found recording the miraculous cures which the
god of healing performed for his faithful worshippers. One
of them tells how a certain Pandarus, a Thessalian, was freed
from the letters which, as a former slave or prisoner of war,
he bore tattooed or branded on his brow. He slept in the
sanctuary with a fillet round his head, and in the morning
he discovered to his joy that the marks of shame&mdash;the blue
or scarlet letters&mdash;had been transferred from his brow to the
fillet. By and by there came to the sanctuary a wicked
man, also with brands or tattoo marks on his face, who had
been charged by Pandarus to pay his debt of gratitude to
the god, and had received the cash for the purpose. But the
cunning fellow thought to cheat the god and keep the money
all to himself. So when the god appeared to him in a
dream and asked anxiously after the money, he boldly denied
that he had it, and impudently prayed the god to remove the
ugly marks from his own brazen brow. He was told to tie
the fillet of Pandarus about his head, then to take it off, and
look at his face in the water of the sacred well. He did so,
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
and sure enough he saw on his forehead the marks of Pandarus
in addition to his own.<note place='foot'>Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική, 1883, col.
213, 214; G. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 802, lines
48 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (vol. ii. pp. 652 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> In the fourth century of our
era Marcellus of Bordeaux prescribed a cure for warts, which
has still a great vogue among the superstitious in various
parts of Europe. Doubtless it was an old traditional remedy
in the fourth, and will long survive the expiry of the twentieth,
century. You are to touch your warts with as many
little stones as you have warts; then wrap the stones in an
ivy leaf, and throw them away in a thoroughfare. Whoever
picks them up will get the warts, and you will be rid of
them.<note place='foot'>Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xxxiv.
102. A similar cure is described by
Pliny (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxii. 149); you are
to touch the warts with chick-peas on
the first day of the moon, wrap the
peas in a cloth, and throw them away
behind you. But Pliny does not say
that the warts will be transferred to
the person who picks up the peas.
On this subject see further J. Hardy,
<q>Wart and Wen Cures,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
Record</hi>, i. (1878) pp. 216-228.</note> A similar cure for warts, with such trifling variations
as the substitution of peas or barley for pebbles, and a rag
or a piece of paper for an ivy leaf, has been prescribed in
modern times in Italy, France, Austria, England, and Scotland.<note place='foot'>Z. Zanetti, <hi rend='italic'>La Medicina delle nostre
donne</hi> (Città di Castello, 1892), pp.
224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. B. Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des
Superstitions</hi> (Paris, 1679), p. 321;
B. Souché, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances, présages et traditions
diverses</hi> (Niort, 1880), p. 19;
J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Göttingen, 1852-1857), i.
248, § 576; Dr. R. F. Kaindl, <q>Aus
dem Volksglauben der Rutenen in
Galizien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxiv. (1893) p. 93;
J. Harland and T. T. Wilkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Lancashire Folk-lore</hi> (Manchester and
London, 1882), p. 157; G. W. Black,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi> (London, 1883), p. 41;
W. Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the North-East
of Scotland</hi> (London, 1881), p. 49;
J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and Second
Sight in the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902), pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Another favourite way of passing on your warts to
somebody else is to make as many knots in a string as you
have warts; then throw the string away or place it under a
stone. Whoever treads on the stone or picks up the thread
will get the warts instead of you; sometimes to complete
the transference it is thought necessary that he should undo
the knots.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 71, § 85; E.
Monseur, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folklore Wallon</hi> (Brussels,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 29; H. Zahler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Krankheit
im Volksglauben des Simmenthals</hi>
(Bern, 1898), p. 93; R. Andree,
<hi rend='italic'>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</hi> (Brunswick,
1896), p. 306.</note> Or you need only place the knotted thread
before sunrise in the spout of a pump; the next person who
works the pump will be sure to get your warts.<note place='foot'>A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861-1862),
i. 483.</note> Equally
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
effective methods are to rub the troublesome excrescences
with down or fat, or to bleed them on a rag, and then throw
away the down, the fat, or the bloody rag. The person
who picks up one or other of these things will be sure to
release you from your warts by involuntarily transferring
them to himself.<note place='foot'>Thiers, Souché, Strackerjan, Monseur,
<hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi>; J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft
and Second Sight in the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow,
1902), p. 95.</note> People in the Orkney Islands will sometimes
wash a sick man, and then throw the water down at a
gateway, in the belief that the sickness will leave the patient
and be transferred to the first person who passes through
the gate.<note place='foot'>Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii. 226.</note> A Bavarian cure for fever is to write upon a
piece of paper, <q>Fever, stay away, I am not at home,</q> and
to put the paper in somebody's pocket. The latter then
catches the fever, and the patient is rid of it.<note place='foot'>G. Lammert, <hi rend='italic'>Volksmedizin und
medizinischer Aberglaube in Bayern</hi>
(Würzburg, 1869), p. 264.</note> Or the
sufferer may cure himself by sticking a twig of the elder-tree
in the ground without speaking. The fever then adheres
to the twig, and whoever pulls up the twig will catch
the disease.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 263.</note> A Bohemian prescription for the same malady
is this. Take an empty pot, go with it to a cross-road,
throw it down, and run away. The first person who kicks
against the pot will catch your fever, and you will be cured.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 167,
§ 1180.</note>
In Oldenburg they say that when a person lies sweating
with fever, he should take a piece of money to himself in
bed. The money is afterwards thrown away on the street,
and whoever picks it up will catch the fever, but the original
patient will be rid of it.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 71, § 85.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
transferred
to asses,
frogs, dogs,
and other
animals.</note>
Often in Europe, as among savages, an attempt is made
to transfer a pain or malady from a man to an animal.
Grave writers of antiquity recommended that, if a man
be stung by a scorpion, he should sit upon an ass with
his face to the tail, or whisper in the animal's ear, <q>A
scorpion has stung me</q>; in either case, they thought,
the pain would be transferred from the man to the
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
ass.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xiii. 9, xv. 1; Pliny,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 155. The authorities
for these cures are respectively
Apuleius and Democritus. The latter
is probably not the atomic philosopher.
See J. G. Frazer, <q>The Language of
Animals,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Archæological Review</hi>,
vol. i. (May, 1888) p. 180, note 140.</note> Many cures of this sort are recorded by Marcellus.
For example, he tells us that the following is a remedy for
toothache. Standing booted under the open sky on the
ground, you catch a frog by the head, spit into its mouth,
ask it to carry away the ache, and then let it go. But the
ceremony must be performed on a lucky day and at a
lucky hour.<note place='foot'>Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xii. 24.</note> In Cheshire the ailment known as aphtha or
thrush, which affects the mouth or throat of infants, is not
uncommonly treated in much the same manner. A young
frog is held for a few moments with its head inside the
mouth of the sufferer, whom it is supposed to relieve by
taking the malady to itself. <q>I assure you,</q> said an old
woman who had often superintended such a cure, <q>we used
to hear the poor frog whooping and coughing, mortal bad,
for days after; it would have made your heart ache to hear
the poor creature coughing as it did about the garden.</q><note place='foot'>W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi> (London,
1883), pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Again Marcellus tells us that if the foam from a mule's
mouth, mixed with warm water, be drunk by an asthmatic
patient, he will at once recover, but the mule will die.<note place='foot'>Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xvii.
18.</note> An
ancient cure for the gripes, recorded both by Pliny and
Marcellus, was to put a live duck to the belly of the
sufferer; the pains passed from the man into the bird, to
which they proved fatal.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxx. 61; Marcellus,
<hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xxvii. 33.
The latter writer mentions (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
xxviii. 123) that the same malady
might similarly be transferred to a
live frog.</note> According to the same writers a
stomachic complaint of which the cause was unknown might
be cured by applying a blind puppy to the suffering part
for three days. The secret disorder thus passed into the
puppy; it died, and a post-mortem examination of its little
body revealed the cause of the disease from which the man
had suffered and of which the dog had died.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxx. 64; Marcellus,
<hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xxviii. 132.</note> Once more,
Marcellus advises that when a man was afflicted with a
disorder of the intestines the physician should catch a live
hare, take the huckle-bone from one of its feet and the down
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
from the belly, then let the hare go, pronouncing as he did
so the words, <q>Run away, run away, little hare, and take
away with you the intestine pain.</q> Further, the doctor was
to fashion the down into thread, with which he was to tie
the huckle-bone to the patient's body, taking great care that
the thread should not be touched by any woman.<note place='foot'>Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xxix. 35.</note> A Northamptonshire,
Devonshire, and Welsh cure for a cough is to put
a hair of the patient's head between two slices of buttered
bread and give the sandwich to a dog. The animal will
thereupon catch the cough and the patient will lose it.<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi> (London, 1879),
p. 143; W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>,
p. 35; Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 226.</note>
Sometimes an ailment is transferred to an animal by sharing
food with it. Thus in Oldenburg, if you are sick of a fever
you set a bowl of sweet milk before a dog and say, <q>Good
luck, you hound! may you be sick and I be sound!</q>
Then when the dog has lapped some of the milk, you take
a swig at the bowl; and then the dog must lap again, and
then you must swig again; and when you and the dog have
done it the third time, he will have the fever and you will be
quit of it. A peasant woman in Abbehausen told her pastor
that she suffered from fever for a whole year and found no
relief. At last somebody advised her to give some of her
food to a dog and a cat. She did so and the fever passed
from her into the animals. But when she saw the poor sick
beasts always before her, she wished it undone. Then the
fever left the cat and the dog and returned to her.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 72, § 86.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
transferred
to birds,
snails, fish,
and fowls.</note>
A Bohemian cure for fever is to go out into the forest
before the sun is up and look for a snipe's nest. When you
have found it, take out one of the young birds and keep it
beside you for three days. Then go back into the wood and
set the snipe free. The fever will leave you at once. The
snipe has taken it away. So in Vedic times the Hindoos of old
sent consumption away with a blue jay. They said, <q>O consumption,
fly away, fly away with the blue jay! With the
wild rush of the storm and the whirlwind, oh, vanish away!</q><note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und
Mähren</hi> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864),
p. 166, § 1173, quoting Kuhn's translation
of <hi rend='italic'>Rig-veda</hi>, x. 97. 13. A
slightly different translation of the
verse is given by H. Grassmann, who
here follows R. Roth (<hi rend='italic'>Rig-veda übersetzt</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 379). Compare
<hi rend='italic'>Hymns of the Rigveda</hi>, translated by
R. T. H. Griffith (Benares, 1889-1892),
iv. 312.</note>
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
In Oldenburg they sometimes hang up a goldfinch or
a turtle-dove in the room of a consumptive patient,
hoping that the bird may draw away the malady from
the sufferer to itself.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 72,
§ 87.</note> A prescription for a cough in Sunderland
is to shave the patient's head and hang the hair
on a bush. When the birds carry the hair to their nests,
they will carry the cough with it.<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi> (London, 1879), p.
143.</note> In the Mark of
Brandenburg a cure for headache is to tie a thread thrice
round your head and then hang it in a loop from a tree;
if a bird flies through the loop, it will take your headache
away with it.<note place='foot'>J. D. H. Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen
der Altmark</hi> (Berlin, 1839), p. 83;
A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 384, § 62.</note> A Saxon remedy for rupture in a
child is to take a snail, thrust it at sunset into a hollow
tree, and stop up the hole with clay. Then as the snail
perishes the child recovers. But this cure must be accompanied
by the recitation of a proper form of words; otherwise
it has no effect.<note place='foot'>R. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Sächsische Volkskunde</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Dresden, 1901), p. 372.</note> A Bohemian remedy for jaundice
is as follows. Take a living tench, tie it to your bare
back and carry it about with you for a whole day. The
tench will turn quite yellow and die. Then throw it
into running water, and your jaundice will depart with it.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 230,
§ 1663. A similar remedy is prescribed
in Bavaria. See G. Lammert,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksmedizin und medizinischer Aberglaube
in Bayern</hi> (Würzburg, 1869),
p. 249.</note>
In the village of Llandegla in Wales there is a church
dedicated to the virgin martyr St. Tecla, where the falling
sickness is, or used to be, cured by being transferred to
a fowl. The patient first washed his limbs in a sacred well
hard by, dropped fourpence into it as an offering, walked
thrice round the well, and thrice repeated the Lord's prayer.
Then the fowl, which was a cock or a hen according as the
patient was a man or a woman, was put into a basket and
carried round first the well and afterwards the church.
Next the sufferer entered the church and lay down under
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
the communion table till break of day. After that he
offered sixpence and departed, leaving the fowl in the
church. If the bird died, the sickness was supposed to
have been transferred to it from the man or woman, who
was now rid of the disorder. As late as 1855 the old
parish clerk of the village remembered quite well to have
seen the birds staggering about from the effects of the fits
which had been transferred to them.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii.
375; W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>, p.
46.</note> In South Glamorgan
and West Pembrokeshire it is thought possible to get rid of
warts by means of a snail. You take a snail with a black
shell, you rub it on each wart and say,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Wart, wart, on the snail's shell black,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Go away soon, and never come back.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then you put the snail on the branch of a tree or bramble
and you nail it down with as many thorns as you have
warts. When the snail has rotted away on the bough, your
warts will have vanished. Another Welsh cure for warts is
to impale a frog on a stick and then to rub the warts on the
creature. The warts disappear as the frog expires.<note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In both
these cases we may assume that the warts are transferred
from the human sufferer to the suffering animal.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
and ill-luck
transferred
to inanimate
objects.</note>
Often the sufferer seeks to shift his burden of sickness or
ill-luck to some inanimate object. In Athens there is a
little chapel of St. John the Baptist built against an ancient
column. Fever patients resort thither, and by attaching a
waxed thread to the inner side of the column believe that
they transfer the fever from themselves to the pillar.<note place='foot'>B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen</hi> (Leipsic, 1871), p. 82.</note> In
the Mark of Brandenburg they say that if you suffer from
giddiness you should strip yourself naked and run thrice
round a flax-field after sunset; in that way the flax will get
the giddiness and you will be rid of it.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 386.</note> Sometimes an
attempt is made to transfer the mischief, whatever it may be,
to the moon. In Oldenburg a peasant related how he rid
himself of a bony excrescence by stroking it thrice crosswise
in the name of the Trinity, and then making a gesture as if
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
he were seizing the deformity and hurling it towards the
moon. In the same part of Germany a cure for warts is to
stand in the light of a waxing moon so that you cannot see
your own shadow, then hold the disfigured hand towards
the moon, and stroke it with the other hand in the direction
of the luminary. Some say that in doing this you should
pronounce these words, <q>Moon, free me from these vermin.</q><note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 74, § 91.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
and trouble
transferred
to trees
and bushes.</note>
But perhaps the thing most commonly employed in
Europe as a receptacle for sickness and trouble of all
sorts is a tree or bush. The modes of transferring the
mischief to it are many. For example, the Esthonians
say that you ought not to go out of the house on a
spring morning before you have eaten or drunk; for if
you do, you may chance to hear one of <q>the sounds
which are not heard in winter,</q> such as the song of a
bird, and that would be unlucky. They think that if
you thus let yourself be deceived or outwitted, as they
call it, by a bird, you will be visited by all sorts of ill-luck
during the year; indeed it may very well happen
that you will fall sick and die before another spring
comes round. However, there is a way of averting the
evil. You have merely to embrace a tree or go thrice
round it, biting into the bark each time or tearing away
a strip of the bark with your teeth. Thus the bad luck
passes from you to the tree, which accordingly withers
away.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1876), pp. 451 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Sicily it is believed that all kinds of marvellous
cures can be effected on the night which precedes Ascension
Day. For example, people who suffer from goitre bite
the bark of a peach-tree just at the moment when the
clocks are striking midnight. Thus the malady is transferred
to the sap of the tree, and its leaves wither away
in exact proportion as the patient recovers. But in order
that the cure may be successful it is absolutely essential
that the bark should be bitten at midnight precisely; a bite
before or after that witching hour is labour thrown away.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Le Tour du Monde</hi>, lxvii. (1894)
p. 308; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, Nouvelle Série, v. (1899)
p. 521.</note>
On St. George's Day, South Slavonian lads and lasses
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
climb thrice up and down a cornel-tree, saying, <q>My laziness
and sleepiness to you, cornel-tree, but health and
booty (?) to me.</q> Then as they wend homewards they
turn once more towards the tree and call out, <q>Cornel-tree!
cornel-tree! I leave you my laziness and sleepiness.</q><note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und
religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</hi> (Münster
i. W., 1890), pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The same people attempt to cure fever by transferring it to
a dwarf elder-bush. Having found such a bush with three
shoots springing from the root, the patient grasps the
points of the three shoots in his hand, bends them down
to the ground, and fastens them there with a stone.
Under the arch thus formed he creeps thrice; then he
cuts off or digs up the three shoots, saying, <q>In three
shoots I cut three sicknesses out. When these three shoots
grow young again, may the fever come back.</q><note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 39.</note> A Bulgarian
cure for fever is to run thrice round a willow-tree at sunrise,
crying, <q>The fever shall shake thee, and the sun shall
warm me.</q><note place='foot'>A. Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Bulgaren</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), p. 400, compare p. 401.</note> In the Greek island of Karpathos the priest
ties a red thread round the neck of a sick person. Next
morning the friends of the patient remove the thread and
go out to the hillside, where they tie the thread to a tree,
thinking that they thus transfer the sickness to the tree.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Blackwood's Magazine</hi>, February
1886, p. 239.</note>
Italians attempt to cure fever in like manner by fastening it
to a tree. The sufferer ties a thread round his left wrist at
night, and hangs the thread on a tree next morning. The
fever is thus believed to be tied up to the tree, and the patient
to be rid of it; but he must be careful not to pass by that
tree again, otherwise the fever would break loose from its
bonds and attack him afresh.<note place='foot'>Z. Zanetti, <hi rend='italic'>La medicina delle nostre
donne</hi> (Città di Castello, 1892), p. 73.</note> An old French remedy for
fever was to bind the patient himself to a tree and leave him
there for a time; some said that the ceremony should be
performed fasting and early in the morning, that the cord or
straw rope with which the person was bound to the tree
should be left there to rot, and that the sufferer should bite
the bark of the tree before returning home.<note place='foot'>J. B. Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi>
(Paris, 1679), pp. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Bohemia
the friends of a fever patient will sometimes carry him head
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
foremost, by means of straw ropes, to a bush, on which they
dump him down. Then he must jump up and run home.
The friends who carried him also flee, leaving the straw
ropes and likewise the fever behind them on the bush.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 167,
§ 1178. A Belgian cure of the same
sort is reported by J. W. Wolf (<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, Göttingen,
1852-1857, i. 223 (wrongly
numbered 219), § 256).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
transferred
to trees by
means of
knots.</note>
Sometimes the sickness is transferred to the tree by
making a knot in one of its boughs. Thus in Mecklenburg
a remedy for fever is to go before sunrise to a willow-tree
and tie as many knots in one of its branches as
the fever has lasted days; but going and coming you must
be careful not to speak a word.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 74, § 90.</note> A Flemish cure for
the ague is to go early in the morning to an old willow, tie
three knots in one of its branches, say, <q>Good-morrow, Old
One, I give thee the cold; good-morrow, Old One,</q> then
turn and run away without looking round.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
(Berlin, 1875-1878), ii. 979.</note> In Rhenish
Bavaria the cure for gout is similar. The patient recites a
spell or prayer while he stands at a willow-bush holding one
of its boughs. When the mystic words have been spoken,
he ties a knot in the bough and departs cured. But all his
life long he must never go near that willow-bush again,
or the gout will come back to him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi>, iv. 2 (Munich,
1867), p. 406.</note> In Sonnenberg, if you
would rid yourself of gout you should go to a young fir-tree
and tie a knot in one of its twigs, saying, <q>God greet thee,
noble fir. I bring thee my gout. Here will I tie a knot and
bind my gout into it. In the name,</q> etc.<note place='foot'>A. Schleicher, <hi rend='italic'>Volkstümliches aus
Sonnenberg</hi> (Weimar, 1858), p. 150;
A. Witschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna, 1878),
p. 283, § 82.</note> Not far from
Marburg, at a place called Neuhof, there is a wood of
birches. Thither on a morning before sunrise, in the last
quarter of the moon, bands of gouty people may often
be seen hobbling in silence. Each of them takes his stand
before a separate tree and pronounces these solemn words:
<q>Here stand I before the judgment bar of God and tie up all
my gout. All the disease in my body shall remain tied up
in this birch-tree.</q> Meanwhile the good physician ties a
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
knot in a birch-twig, repeating thrice, <q>In the name of the
Father,</q> etc.<note place='foot'>W. Kolbe, <hi rend='italic'>Hessische Volks-Sitten
und Gebrauche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Marburg, 1888), pp.
88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
transferred
to trees
by means
of the
patient's
hair or
nails.</note>
Another way of transferring gout from a man to a tree
is this. Pare the nails of the sufferer's fingers and clip some
hairs from his legs. Bore a hole in an oak, stuff the
nails and hair in the hole, stop up the hole again,
and smear it with cow's dung. If, for three months thereafter,
the patient is free of gout, you may be sure the oak
has it in his stead.<note place='foot'>C. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Der Aberglaube des
Mittelalters</hi> (Bâle, 1884), p. 104.</note> A German cure for toothache is to
bore a hole in a tree and cram some of the sufferer's hair
into it.<note place='foot'>H. Zahler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Krankheit im
Volksglauben des Simmenthals</hi> (Bern,
1898), p. 94.</note> In these cases, though no doubt the tree suffers
the pangs of gout or toothache respectively, it does so
with a sort of stoical equanimity, giving no outward and
visible sign of the pains that rack it inwardly. It is not
always so, however. The tree cannot invariably suppress
every symptom of its suffering. It may hide its toothache,
but it cannot so easily hide its warts. In Cheshire
if you would be rid of warts, you have only to rub them
with a piece of bacon, cut a slit in the bark of an ash-tree,
and slip the bacon under the bark. Soon the warts
will disappear from your hand, only however to reappear
in the shape of rough excrescences or knobs on the bark of
the tree.<note place='foot'>W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>, p. 38.</note> Again in Beauce and Perche, two provinces of
France, fever may be transferred to a young aspen by inserting
the parings of the patient's nails in the tree and then
plastering up the hole to prevent the fever from getting
out. But the operation must be performed by night.<note place='foot'>F. Chapiseau, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore de la
Beauce et du Perche</hi> (Paris, 1902), i.
213.</note>
How subject an aspen is to fever must be obvious to the
meanest capacity from the trembling of its leaves in every
breath of wind; nothing therefore can be easier or more
natural than to transfer the malady, with its fits of shaking,
to the tree. At Berkhampstead, in Hertfordshire, there used
to be certain oak-trees which were long celebrated for the
cure of ague. The transference of the malady to the tree
was simple but painful. A lock of the sufferer's hair was
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
pegged into an oak; then by a sudden wrench he left his
hair and his ague behind him in the tree.<note place='foot'>W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>, p. 39.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Toothache,
headache,
and fevers
plugged up
in trees.</note>
It seems clear that, though you may stow away your
pain or sickness in a tree, there is a considerable risk of its
coming out again. To obviate this danger common prudence
suggests that you should plug or bung up the hole as tight
as you can. And this, as we should naturally expect, is
often done. A German cure for toothache or headache is to
wrap some of the sufferer's cut hair and nails in paper, make
a hole in the tree, stuff the parcel into it, and stop up the
hole with a plug made from a tree which has been struck by
lightning.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 310,
§ 490.</note> In Bohemia they say that, if you feel the fever
coming on, you should pull out some of your hair, tear off a
strip of a garment you are wearing, and bore a hole in
a willow-tree. Having done so, you put the hair and
the rag in the hole and stop it up with a wedge of hawthorn.
Then go home without looking back, and if a voice calls to
you, be sure not to answer. When you have complied with
this prescription, the fever will cease.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>, p.
165, § 1160.</note> In Oldenburg a
common remedy for fever is to bore a hole in a tree, breathe
thrice into the hole, and then plug it up. Once a man who
had thus shut up his fever in a tree was jeered at by a sceptical
acquaintance for his credulity. So he went secretly to
the tree and drew the stopper, and out came that fever and
attacked the sceptic.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>,
ii. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 89.</note> Sometimes they say that the tree
into which you thus breathe your fever or ague should be a
hollow willow, and that in going to the tree you should be
careful not to utter a word, and not to cross water.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 979.</note> Again,
we read of a man who suffered acute pains in his arm. So
<q>they beat up red corals with oaken leaves, and having kept
them on the part affected till suppuration, they did in the
morning put this mixture into an hole bored with an auger in
the root of an oak, respecting the east, and stop up this hole
with a peg made of the same tree; from thenceforth the
pain did altogether cease, and when they took out the
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
amulet immediately the torments returned sharper than
before.</q><note place='foot'>T. J. Pettigrew, <hi rend='italic'>On Superstitions
connected with the History and Practice
of Medicine and Surgery</hi> (London,
1844), p. 77; W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>,
p. 37.</note> These facts seem to put it beyond the reach of
reasonable doubt that the pain or malady is actually in the
tree and waiting to pop out, if only it gets the chance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. The Nailing of Evils.'/>
<head>§ 6. The Nailing of Evils.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sickness
and pain
pegged or
nailed into
trees.</note>
Often the patient, without troubling to bore a hole in
the tree, merely knocks a wedge, a peg, or a nail into it,
believing that he thus pegs or nails the sickness or pain into
the wood. Thus a Bohemian cure for fever is to go to a tree
and hammer a wedge into it with the words <q>There, I knock
you in, that you may come no more out to me.</q><note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 167, § 1182.</note> A German
way of getting rid of toothache is to go in silence before sunrise
to a tree, especially a willow-tree, make a slit in the
bark on the north side of the tree, or on the side that looks
towards the sunrise, cut out a splinter from the place thus
laid bare, poke the splinter into the aching tooth till blood
comes, then put back the splinter in the tree, fold down the
bark over it, and tie a string round the trunk, that the
splinter may grow into the trunk as before. As it does so,
your pain will vanish; but you must be careful not to go
near the tree afterwards, or you will get the toothache again.
And any one who pulls the splinter out will also get the
toothache. He has in fact uncorked the toothache which
was safely bottled up in the tree, and he must take the
natural consequence of his rash act.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>,
i. 73, § 89; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 490.</note> A simpler plan,
practised in Persia as well as in France and Germany, is
merely to scrape the aching tooth with a nail or a twig till
it bleeds, and then hammer the nail or the twig into a tree.
In the Vosges, in Voigtland, and probably elsewhere, it is
believed that any person who should draw out such a nail
or twig would get the toothache.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), p. 40;
A. Meyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions, Coutumes,
Légendes et Contes des Ardennes</hi>
(Charleville, 1890), p. 174; A.
Schleicher, <hi rend='italic'>Volkstümliches aus Sonnenberg</hi>
(Weimer, 1858), p. 149; J. A. E.
Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch, Aberglauben,
Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen
im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic, 1867), p. 414;
A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna, 1878),
p. 283, § 79; H. Zahler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Krankheit
im Volksglauben des Simmenthals</hi>
(Bern, 1898), p. 93.</note> An old lime-tree at
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
Evessen, in Brunswick, is studded with nails of various
shapes, including screw-nails, which have been driven into it
by persons who suffered from aching teeth.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</hi>
(Brunswick, 1896), p. 307.</note> In the Mark
of Brandenburg they say that the ceremony should be performed
when the moon is on the wane, and that the bloody
nail should be knocked, without a word being spoken, into
the north side of an oak-tree, where the sun cannot shine
on it; after that the person will have no more toothache so
long as the tree remains standing.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 384, § 66.</note> Here it is plainly
implied that the toothache is bottled up in the tree. If
further proof were needed that in such cases the malady
is actually transferred to the tree and stowed away in its
trunk, it would be afforded by the belief that if the tree is
cut down the toothache will return to the original sufferer.<note place='foot'>H. Zahler, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi></note>
Rupture as well as toothache can be nailed to an oak. For
that purpose all that need be done is to take a coffin-nail
and touch with it the injured part of the patient; then set
the sufferer barefoot before an oak-tree, and knock the nail
into the trunk above his head. That transfers the rupture
to the tree, and that is why you may often see the boles of
ancient oaks studded with nails.<note place='foot'>P. Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche in alter und
neuer Zeit</hi>, i. (Wurzen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>) p. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ghosts
and gods
bunged up
in India. Demon
plugged up
and ghost
nailed
down.</note>
Such remedies are not confined to Europe. At Bilda
in Algeria, there is a sacred old olive-tree, in which
pilgrims, especially women, knock nails for the purpose
of ridding themselves of their ailments and troubles.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908),
p. 436.</note>
Again, the Majhwars, a Dravidian tribe in the hill country
of South Mirzapur, believe that all disease is due to
ghosts, but that ghosts, when they become troublesome, can
be shut up in a certain tree, which grows on a little
islet in a very deep pool of the Sukandar, a tributary
of the Kanhar river. Accordingly, when the country is
infested by ghosts, in other words when disease is raging, a
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
skilful wizard seeks for a piece of deer-horn in the jungle.
When he has found it, he hammers it with a stone into the
tree and thus shuts up the ghost. The tree is covered with
hundreds of such pieces of horn.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>The Tribes and Castes
of the North-Western Provinces and
Oudh</hi> (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 436 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 43, 162. Compare
E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes in
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1906), pp.
313, 331.</note> Again, when a new
settlement is being made in some parts of the North-Western
Provinces of India, it is deemed necessary to apprehend and
lay by the heels the local deities, who might otherwise do
a deal of mischief to the intruders on their domain. A
sorcerer is called in to do the business. For days he
marches about the place mustering the gods to the tuck of
drum. When they are all assembled, two men known as
the Earthman and the Leafman, who represent the gods of
the earth and of the trees respectively, become full of the
spirit, being taken possession of bodily by the local deities.
In this exalted state they shout and caper about in a fine
frenzy, and their seemingly disjointed ejaculations, which
are really the divine voice speaking through them, are
interpreted by the sorcerer. When the critical moment has
come, the wizard rushes in between the two incarnations of
divinity, clutches at the spirits which are hovering about
them in the air, and pours grains of sesame through their
hands into a perforated piece of the wood of the sacred fig-tree.
Then without a moment's delay he plasters up the hole with
a mixture of clay and cow-dung, and carefully buries the
piece of wood on the spot which is to be the shrine of the
local deities. Needless to say that the gods themselves are
bunged up in the wood and are quite incapable of doing
further mischief, provided always that the usual offerings are
made to them at the shrine where they live in durance vile.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In this case the source of mischief is imprisoned, not in a
tree, but in a piece of one; but the principle is clearly the
same. Similarly in Corea an English lady observed at a
cross-road a small log with several holes like those of a
mouse-trap, one of which was plugged up doubly with bungs
of wood. She was told that a demon, whose ravages spread
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
sickness in a family, had been inveigled by a sorceress into
that hole and securely bunged up. It was thought proper
for all passers-by to step over the incarcerated devil, whether
to express their scorn and abhorrence of him, or more
probably as a means of keeping him forcibly down.<note place='foot'>Mrs. Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea and her
Neighbours</hi> (London, 1898), ii. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
Cochinchina a troublesome ghost can be confined to the
grave by the simple process of knocking a nail or thrusting
a bar of iron into the earth at the point where the head of
the corpse may be presumed to repose.<note place='foot'>P. Giran, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion
Annamites</hi> (Paris, 1912), pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evils
nailed into
stones,
walls,
door-posts,
and so on.</note>
From knocking the mischief into a tree or a log it is
only a step to knocking it into a stone, a door-post, a wall,
or such like. At the head of Glen Mor, near Port Charlotte,
in Islay, there may be seen a large boulder, and it is said
that whoever drives a nail into this stone will thereafter be
secure from attacks of toothache. A farmer in Islay told an
enquirer some years ago how a passing stranger once cured
his grandmother of toothache by driving a horse-nail into
the lintel of the kitchen door, warning her at the same time
to keep the nail there, and if it should come loose just to
tap it with a hammer till it had a grip again. She had no
more toothache for the rest of her life.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, <q>Notes on folk-lore
Objects collected in Argyleshire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895) p. 158.</note> In Brunswick it is
open to any one to nail his toothache either into a wall or
into a tree, as he thinks fit; the pain is cured quite as well
in the one way as in the other.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</hi>
(Brunswick, 1896), p. 307.</note> So in Beauce and Perche
a healer has been known to place a new nail on the aching
tooth of a sufferer and then knock the nail into a door, a
beam, or a joist.<note place='foot'>F. Chapiseau, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore de la
Beauce et du Perche</hi> (Paris, 1902), i.
170.</note> The procedure in North Africa is similar.
You write certain Arabic letters and numbers on the wall;
then, while the patient puts a finger on the aching tooth,
you knock a nail, with a light tap of a hammer, into the
first letter on the wall, reciting a verse of the Coran as you
do so. Next you ask the sufferer whether the pain is now
abated, and if he says <q>Yes</q> you draw out the nail entirely.
But if he says <q>No,</q> you shift the nail to the next letter in
the wall, and so on, till the pain goes away, which it always
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
does, sooner or later.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908), pp.
228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Bohemian who fears he is about
to have an attack of fever will snatch up the first thing that
comes to hand and nail it to the wall. That keeps the
fever from him.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 116, § 1172.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Devils and
ghosts
nailed
down in
Morocco,
Tunis, and
Egypt.
Headache
nailed into
a door or
a wall. Plague
pegged
into a hole.</note>
As in Europe we nail toothache or fever to a wall, so
in Morocco they nail devils. A house in Mogador having
been infested with devils, who threw stones about it in
a way that made life a burden to the inmates, a holy man
was called in to exorcise them, which he did effectually
by pronouncing an incantation and driving a nail into the
wall; at every stroke of the hammer a hissing sound
announced that another devil had received his quietus.<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>
(London, 1876), pp. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Among the modern Arabs the soul of a murdered man must
be nailed down. Thus if a man be murdered in Egypt, his
ghost will rise from the ground where his blood was shed:
but it can be prevented from doing so by driving a new nail,
which has never been used, into the earth at the spot where
the murder was committed. In Tripoli the practice is
similar. Some years ago a native was murdered close to
the door of a little Italian inn. Immediately the Arabs of
the neighbourhood thronged thither and effectually laid the
ghost with hammer and nail. When the innkeeper rashly
attempted to remove the nail, he was warned that to do so
would be to set the ghost free.<note place='foot'>R. C. Thompson, <hi rend='italic'>Semitic Magic</hi>
(London, 1908), p. 17. It would seem
that in Macedonia demons and ghosts
can be hammered into walls. See G.
F. Abbott, <hi rend='italic'>Macedonian Folklore</hi> (Cambridge,
1903), p. 221. In Chittagong,
as soon as a coffin has been carried out
of the house, a nail is knocked into the
threshold <q>to prevent death from
entering the dwelling, at least for a
time.</q> See Th. Bérengier, <q>Les
funérailles à Chittagong,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xiii. (1881) p. 504.</note> In modern Egypt numbers
of people afflicted with headache used to knock a nail into
the great wooden door of the old south gate of Cairo, for the
purpose of charming away the pain; others who suffered
from toothache used to extract a tooth and insert it in a
crevice of the door, or fix it in some other way, in order to
be rid of toothache for the future. A holy and miraculous
personage, invisible to mortal eyes, was supposed to have
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
one of his stations at this gate.<note place='foot'>E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Modern Egyptians</hi> (Paisley and
London, 1895), ch. x. p. 240.</note> In Mosul also a
sheikh can cure headache by first laying his hands on the
sufferer's head and then hammering a nail into a wall.<note place='foot'>R. C. Thompson, <hi rend='italic'>Semitic Magic</hi>
(London, 1908), p. 18.</note>
Not far from Neuenkirchen, in Oldenburg, there is a farmhouse
to which, while the Thirty Years' War was raging,
the plague came lounging along from the neighbouring town
in the shape of a bluish vapour. Entering the house it
popped into a hole in the door-post of one of the rooms.
The farmer saw his chance, and quick as thought he seized
a peg and hammered it into the hole, so that the plague
could not possibly get out. After a time, however, thinking
the danger was past, he drew out the peg. Alas! with the
peg came creeping and curling out of the hole the blue
vapour once more. The plague thus let loose seized on
every member of the family in that unhappy house and left
not one of them alive.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>,
ii. 120, § 428 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>. A similar story is
told of a house in Neuenburg (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
ii. 182, § 512 <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>).</note> Again, the great plague which devastated
the ancient world in the reign of Marcus Antoninus is
said to have originated in the curiosity and greed of some
Roman soldiers, who, pillaging the city of Seleucia, came
upon a narrow hole in a temple and incautiously enlarged
the opening in the expectation of discovering treasure. But
that which came forth from the hole was not treasure but
the plague. It had been pent up in a secret chamber by
the magic art of the Chaldeans; but now, released from its
prison by the rash act of the spoilers, it stalked abroad and
spread death and destruction from the Euphrates to the
Nile and the Atlantic.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 6.
24.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Plague
nailed
down in
ancient
Rome.</note>
The simple ceremony, in which to this day the superstition
of European peasants sees a sovereign remedy for
plague and fever and toothache, has come down to us from
a remote antiquity; for in days when as yet Paris and
London were not, when France still revered the Druids as
the masters of all knowledge, human and divine, and when
our own country was still covered with virgin forests, the
home of savage beasts and savage men, the same ceremony
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
was solemnly performed from time to time by the highest
magistrate at Rome, to stay the ravages of pestilence or retrieve
disaster that threatened the foundations of the national
life. In the fourth century before our era the city of Rome
was desolated by a great plague which raged for three years,
carrying off some of the highest dignitaries and a great
multitude of common folk. The historian who records the
calamity informs us that when a banquet had been offered
to the gods in vain, and neither human counsels nor divine
help availed to mitigate the violence of the disease, it was
resolved for the first time in Roman history to institute
dramatical performances as an appropriate means of appeasing
the wrath of the celestial powers. Accordingly
actors were fetched from Etruria, who danced certain simple
and decorous dances to the music of a flute. But even this
novel spectacle failed to amuse or touch, to move to tears
or laughter the sullen gods. The plague still raged, and at
the very moment when the actors were playing their best in
the circus beside the Tiber, the yellow river rose in angry
flood and drove players and spectators, wading and splashing
through the fast-deepening waters, away from the show.
It was clear that the gods spurned plays as well as prayers
and banquets; and in the general consternation it was felt
that some more effectual measure should be taken to put an
end to the scourge. Old men remembered that a plague
had once been stayed by the knocking of a nail into a wall;
and accordingly the Senate resolved that now in their extremity,
when all other means had failed, a supreme magistrate
should be appointed for the sole purpose of performing this
solemn ceremony. The appointment was made, the nail was
knocked, and the plague ceased, sooner or later.<note place='foot'>Livy, vii. 1-3. The plague raged
from 365 to 363 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, when it was
happily stayed in the manner described
in the text.</note> What
better proof could be given of the saving virtue of a nail?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pestilence
and civil
discord
nailed into
a wall in
Rome.</note>
Twice more within the same century the Roman people
had recourse to the same venerable ceremony as a cure for
public calamities with which the ordinary remedies, civil and
religious, seemed unable to cope. One of these occasions
was a pestilence;<note place='foot'>Livy, ix. 28. This happened in
the year 313 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> the other was a strange mortality among
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
the leading men, which public opinion traced, rightly or
wrongly, to a series of nefarious crimes perpetrated by noble
matrons, who took their husbands off by poison. The
crimes, real or imaginary, were set down to frenzy, and
nothing could be thought of so likely to minister to minds
diseased as the knocking of a nail into a wall. Search
among the annals of the city proved that in a season of civil
discord, when the state had been rent by party feud, the
same time-honoured remedy, the same soothing balm, had
been applied with the happiest results to the jarring interests
and heated passions of the disputants. Accordingly the old
nostrum was tried once more, and again success appeared to
justify the experiment.<note place='foot'>Livy, viii. 18. These events took place in 331 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The annual
ceremony
of knocking
in a nail
at Rome.</note>
If the Romans in the fourth century before Christ thus
deemed it possible to rid themselves of pestilence, frenzy,
and sedition by hammering them into a wall, even as French
and German peasants still rid themselves of fever and toothache
by knocking them into a tree, their prudent ancestors
appear to have determined that so salutary a measure should
not be restricted in its scope to meeting special and urgent
emergencies as they arose, but should regularly diffuse its
benefits over the community by anticipating and, as it were,
nipping in the bud evils which, left unchecked, might grow
to dangerous proportions. This, we may conjecture, was
the original intention of an ancient Roman law which
ordained that the highest magistrate of the republic should
knock in a nail every year on the thirteenth day of September.
The law might be seen, couched in old-fashioned
language, engraved on a tablet which was fastened to a wall
of the temple of Capitoline Jupiter; and although the place
where the nails were driven in is nowhere definitely stated
by classical writers, there are some grounds for thinking that
it may have been the same wall on which the law that
sanctioned the custom was exhibited. Livy tells us that the
duty of affixing the nail, at one time discharged by the
consuls, was afterwards committed to dictators, whose higher
rank consorted better with the dignity and importance of the
function. At a later time the custom fell into abeyance, and
the ancient ceremony was revived only from time to time in
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
seasons of grave peril or extraordinary calamity, which
seemed to attest the displeasure of the gods at modern ways,
and disposed men to bethink them of ancestral lore and to
walk in the old paths.<note place='foot'>Livy, vii. 3. Livy says nothing
as to the place where the nails were
affixed; but from Festus (p. 56 ed.
C. O. Müller) we learn that it was the
wall of a temple, and as the date of the
ceremony was also the date of the dedication
of the temple of Jupiter on the
Capitol (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Publicola</hi>, 14), we
may fairly conjecture that this temple
was the scene of the rite. It is the
more necessary to call attention to the
uncertainty which exists on this point
because modern writers, perhaps misunderstanding
the words of Livy, have
commonly stated as a fact what is at
best only a more or less probable
hypothesis. Octavian seems to have
provided for the knocking of a nail
into the temple of Mars by men who
had held the office of censor. See
Dio Cassius, lv. 10, ἧλόν τε αὐτῷ ὑπὸ τῶν
τιμητευσάντων προσπήγνυσθαι.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ceremony
was
probably
a purificatory
rite
designed
to disarm
and disable
all evils
that might
threaten
the Roman
state in the
course of
the year. Roman
cure for
epilepsy.</note>
In antiquity the annual practice of hammering a nail
into a wall was not confined to Rome. It was observed also
at Vulsinii, in Etruria, where the nails thus fixed in the
temple of the goddess Nortia served as a convenient means
of recording and numbering the years.<note place='foot'>Livy, vii. 3. Festus speaks (p. 56
ed. C. O. Müller) of <q>the annual nail,
which was fixed in the walls of temples
for the purpose of numbering the
years,</q> as if the practice were common.
From Cicero's passing reference to the
custom (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex hoc die clavum anni
movebis</foreign>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Atticum</hi>, v. 15. 1)
we see that it was matter of notoriety.
Hence we may safely reject Mommsen's
theory, which Mr. W. Warde
Fowler is disposed to accept (<hi rend='italic'>The
Roman Festivals of the period of the
Republic</hi>, London, 1899, pp. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>),
that the supposed annual custom never
existed except in the brains of Roman
Dryasdusts.</note> To Roman antiquaries
of a later period it seemed, naturally enough, that
such a practice had indeed no other object than that of
marking the flight of time in ages when writing was but
little used.<note place='foot'>See Livy and Festus, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> Yet a little reflection will probably convince us
that this, though it was doubtless a useful consequence of the
custom, can hardly have been its original intention. For it
will scarcely be disputed that the annual observance of the
custom cannot be wholly dissociated from its occasional
observance in seasons of great danger or calamity, and that
whatever explanation we give of the one ought to apply to
the other also. Now it is plain that if we start from the
annual observance and regard it as no more than a timekeeper
or mode of recording the years, we shall never reach
an adequate explanation of the occasional observance. If
the nails were merely ready reckoners of the years, how
could they come to be used as supreme remedies for pestilence,
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
frenzy, and sedition, resorted to by the state in
desperate emergencies when all the ordinary resources of
policy and religion had failed? On the other hand, if we
start from the occasional observance and view it, in accordance
with modern analogies, as a rude attempt to dispose of
intangible evils as if they were things that could be handled
and put away out of sight, we can readily understand how
such an attempt, from being made occasionally, might come
to be repeated annually for the sake of wiping out all
the old troubles and misfortunes of the past year and
enabling the community to start afresh, unencumbered by
a fardel of ills, at the beginning of a new year. Fortunately
we can shew that the analogy which is thus assumed to
exist between the Roman custom and modern superstition is
not a merely fanciful one; in other words, it can be proved
that the Romans, like modern clowns, did believe in the
possibility of nailing down trouble, in a literal and physical
sense, into a material substance. Pliny tells us that an
alleged cure for epilepsy, or the falling sickness, was to drive
an iron nail into the ground on the spot which was first
struck by the patient's head as he fell.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 63.</note> In the light
of the modern instances which have come before us, we
can hardly doubt that the cure was supposed to consist
in actually nailing the disease into the earth in such a
way that it could not get up and attack the sufferer again.
Precisely parallel is a Suffolk cure for ague. You must go
by night alone to a cross-road, and just as the clock strikes
the midnight hour you must turn yourself about thrice and
drive a tenpenny nail up to the head into the ground.
Then walk away backwards from the spot before the clock
is done striking twelve, and you will miss the ague; but the
next person who passes over the nail will catch the malady
in your stead.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore, Suffolk</hi>, edited
by Lady E. C. Gurdon (London,
1893), p. 14. In the north-west
Highlands of Scotland it used to be
customary to bury a black cock alive
on the spot where an epileptic patient
fell down. Along with the cock were
buried parings of the patient's nails
and a lock of his hair. See (Sir)
Arthur Mitchell, <hi rend='italic'>On various Superstitions
in the North-West Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh, 1862),
p. 26; J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft
and Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
p. 97. Probably the disease was
supposed to be buried with the cock
in the ground. The ancient Hindoos
imagined that epilepsy was caused by
a dog-demon. When a boy fell down
in a fit, his father or other competent
person used to wrap the sufferer in a
net, and carry him into the hall, not
through the door, but through an
opening made for the purpose in the
roof. Then taking up some earth in
the middle of the hall, at the place
where people gambled, he sprinkled
the spot with water, cast dice on it,
and laid the boy on his back on the
dice. After that he prayed to the
dog-demon, saying, <q>Doggy, let him
loose! Reverence be to thee, barker,
bender! Doggy, let him loose! Reverence
be to thee, barker, bender!</q> See
<hi rend='italic'>The Grihya Sutras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg, Part i. (Oxford, 1886) pp.
296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> Part ii. (Oxford, 1892) pp.
219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 286 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the
East</hi>, vols. xxix. and xxx.). Apparently
the place where people gambled was
for some reason supposed to be a spot
where an epileptic could divest himself
most readily of his malady. But the
connexion of thought is obscure.</note> Here it is plainly assumed that the ague of
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
which the patient is relieved has been left by him nailed
down into the earth at the cross-road, and we may fairly
suppose that a similar assumption underlay the Roman cure
for epilepsy. Further, we seem to be now justified in holding
that originally, when a Roman dictator sought to stay a
plague, to restore concord, or to terminate an epidemic
of madness by knocking a nail into a wall, he was doing for
the commonwealth exactly what any private man might do
for an epileptic patient by knocking a nail into the ground
on the spot where his poor friend had collapsed. In other
words, he was hammering the plague, the discord, or the
madness into a hole from which it could not get out to
afflict the community again.<note place='foot'>The analogy of the Roman custom
to modern superstitious practices has
been rightly pointed out by Mr. E. S.
Hartland (<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iv. (1893) pp.
457, 464; <hi rend='italic'>Legend of Perseus</hi>, ii. 188),
but I am unable to accept his general
explanation of these and some other
practices as modes of communion with
a divinity.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knocking
nails into
idols as a
means of
attracting
the attention
of the
deity or
spirit.</note>
Different in principle from the foregoing customs appears
to be the Loango practice of sticking nails into wooden idols or
fetishes. The intention of knocking a nail into a worshipful
image is said to be simply to attract the notice of the deity
in a forcible manner to the request of his worshipper; it is like
pinching a man or running a pin into his leg as a hint that you
desire to speak with him. Hence in order to be quite sure of
riveting the god's attention the nails are sometimes made
red-hot.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi> (Jena, 1874-1875),
ii. 176.</note> Even the most absent-minded deity could hardly
overlook a petition urged in so importunate a fashion. The
practice is resorted to in many emergencies. For example,
when a man has been robbed, he will go and get a priest to
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
knock a nail into an idol. The sharp pang naturally exasperates
the deity and he seeks to wreak his wrath on the
thief, who is the real occasion of his suffering. So when the
thief hears of what has been done, he brings back the stolen
goods in fear and trembling. Similarly a nail may be
knocked into an idol for the purpose of making somebody
fall ill; and if a sick man fancies that his illness is due to
an enemy who has played him this trick, he will send to the
priest of the idol and pay him to remove the nail.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 175-178.
Compare Father Campana, <q>Congo,
Mission Catholique de Landana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les
Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxvii. (1895) p.
93; <hi rend='italic'>Notes Analytiques sur les Collections
Ethnographiques du Musée du
Congo</hi>, i. (Brussels, 1902-1906) pp.
153, 246; B. H. Mullen, <q>Fetishes
from Landana, South-West Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, v. (1905) pp. 102-104; R. E.
Dennett, <q>Bavili Notes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xvi. (1905) pp. 382 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>At the
Back of the Black Man's Mind</hi>
(London, 1906), pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
The Ethnological Museum at Berlin
possesses a number of rude images
from Loango and Congo, which are
thickly studded with nails hammered
into their bodies. The intention of
the custom, as explained to me by Professor
von Luschan, is to pain the
fetish and so to refresh his memory,
lest he should forget to do his duty.</note> This
mode of refreshing the memory and stimulating the activity
of a supernatural being is not confined to the negroes of
Loango; it is practised also by French Catholics, as we
learn from Sir John Rhys. <q>Some years ago,</q> he writes,
<q>when I was on a visit at the late Ernest Renan's house at
Rosmapamon, near Perros-Guirec on the north coast of
Brittany, our genial host took his friends one day to see some
of the sights of that neighbourhood. Among other things
which he showed us was a statue of St. Guirec standing at the
head of an open creek. It was of wood, and altogether a very
rude work of art, if such it might be called; but what attracted
our attention most was the fact that it had innumerable pins
stuck into it. We asked M. Renan what the pins meant,
and his explanation was exceedingly quaint. He said that
when any young woman in the neighbourhood made up her
mind that she should marry, she came there and asked the
saint to provide her with a husband, and to do so without
undue delay. She had every confidence in the willingness
and ability of the saint to oblige her, but she was haunted by
the fear that he might be otherwise engaged and forget her
request. So she would stick pins into him, and thus goad
him, as she fancied, to exert himself on her behalf. This is
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
why the saint's statue was full of pins.</q><note place='foot'>Sir John Rhys, <q>Celtae and
Galli,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the British
Academy</hi>, ii. (1905-1906) pp. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in Japan
sufferers from toothache sometimes stick needles into a
willow-tree, <q>believing that the pain caused to the tree-spirit
will force it to exercise its power to cure.</q><note place='foot'>Lafcadio Hearn, <hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan</hi> (London, 1894), ii.
598 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, note.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Two
different
spiritual
applications
of
nails or
pins.</note>
Thus it would seem that we must distinguish at least
two uses of nails or pins in their application to spirits and
spiritual influences. In one set of cases the nails act as
corks or bungs to bottle up and imprison a troublesome
spirit; in the other set of cases they act as spurs or goads to
refresh his memory and stimulate his activity. But so far
as the evidence which I have cited allows us to judge, the
use of nails as spiritual bungs appears to be commoner than
their use as mental refreshers.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Omnipresence of Demons.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attempts
to get rid
of the accumulated
sorrows
of a whole
people.</note>
In the foregoing chapter the primitive principle of the
transference of ills to another person, animal, or thing was
explained and illustrated. A consideration of the means
taken, in accordance with this principle, to rid individuals of
their troubles and distresses led us to believe that at Rome
similar means had been adopted to free the whole community,
at a single blow of the hammer, from diverse evils
that afflicted it. I now propose to shew that such attempts
to dismiss at once the accumulated sorrows of a people are
by no means rare or exceptional, but that on the contrary
they have been made in many lands, and that from being
occasional they tend to become periodic and annual.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sorrows
conceived
of as the
work of
demons.</note>
It needs some effort on our part to realise the frame of
mind which prompts these attempts. Bred in a philosophy
which strips nature of personality and reduces it to the
unknown cause of an orderly series of impressions on our
senses, we find it hard to put ourselves in the place of the
savage, to whom the same impressions appear in the guise
of spirits or the handiwork of spirits. For ages the army of
spirits, once so near, has been receding further and further
from us, banished by the magic wand of science from hearth
and home, from ruined cell and ivied tower, from haunted
glade and lonely mere, from the riven murky cloud that
belches forth the lightning, and from those fairer clouds that
pillow the silver moon or fret with flakes of burning red the
golden eve. The spirits are gone even from their last
stronghold in the sky, whose blue arch no longer passes,
except with children, for the screen that hides from mortal
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
eyes the glories of the celestial world. Only in poets'
dreams or impassioned flights of oratory is it given to
catch a glimpse of the last flutter of the standards of
the retreating host, to hear the beat of their invisible wings,
the sound of their mocking laughter, or the swell of angel
music dying away in the distance. Far otherwise is it with
the savage. To his imagination the world still teems with
those motley beings whom a more sober philosophy has
discarded. Fairies and goblins, ghosts and demons, still
hover about him both waking and sleeping. They dog his
footsteps, dazzle his senses, enter into him, harass and
deceive and torment him in a thousand freakish and mischievous
ways. The mishaps that befall him, the losses he
sustains, the pains he has to endure, he commonly sets
down, if not to the magic of his enemies, to the spite or
anger or caprice of the spirits. Their constant presence
wearies him, their sleepless malignity exasperates him; he
longs with an unspeakable longing to be rid of them altogether,
and from time to time, driven to bay, his patience
utterly exhausted, he turns fiercely on his persecutors and
makes a desperate effort to chase the whole pack of them
from the land, to clear the air of their swarming multitudes,
that he may breathe more freely and go on his way unmolested,
at least for a time. Thus it comes about that the
endeavour of primitive people to make a clean sweep of all
their troubles generally takes the form of a grand hunting
out and expulsion of devils or ghosts. They think that
if they can only shake off these their accursed tormentors,
they will make a fresh start in life, happy and innocent;
the tales of Eden and the old poetic golden age will come
true again.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Primitive
belief in
the omnipresence
of
demons.</note>
Hence, before we review some examples of these spirit-hunts,
it may be well to adduce evidence of the deep hold
which a belief in the omnipresence and malignity of spirits
has upon the primitive mind. The reader will be better
able to understand the savage remedy when he has an inkling
of the nature of the evil which it is designed to combat.
In citing the evidence I shall for the most part reproduce
the exact words of my authorities lest I should incur the suspicion
of deepening unduly the shadows in a gloomy picture.
</p>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons in
Australia and West Africa.</note>
Thus in regard to the aborigines of Australia we are
told that <q>the number of supernatural beings, feared if not
loved, that they acknowledge is exceedingly great; for not
only are the heavens peopled with such, but the whole face
of the country swarms with them; every thicket, most watering-places,
and all rocky places abound with evil spirits.
In like manner, every natural phenomenon is believed to be
the work of demons, none of which seem of a benign nature,
one and all apparently striving to do all imaginable mischief
to the poor blackfellow.</q><note place='foot'>A. Oldfield, <q>The Aborigines of
Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S., iii.
(1865) p. 228.</note> <q>The negro,</q> says another writer,
<q>is wont to regard the whole world around him as peopled
with invisible beings, to whom he imputes every misfortune
that happens to him, and from whose harmful influence he
seeks to protect himself by all kinds of magic means.</q><note place='foot'>J. Büttikoffer, <q>Einiges über die
Eingebornen von Liberia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, i.
(1888) p. 85.</note>
The Bantu negroes of Western Africa <q>regard their god as
the creator of man, plants, animals, and the earth, and they
hold that having made them, he takes no further interest in
the affair. But not so the crowd of spirits with which the
universe is peopled, they take only too much interest, and
the Bantu wishes they would not and is perpetually saying
so in his prayers, a large percentage whereof amounts to,
<q>Go away, we don't want you.</q> <q>Come not into this house,
this village, or its plantations.</q></q> Almost all these subordinate
spirits are malevolent.<note place='foot'>Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in
West Africa</hi> (London, 1897) pp. 442
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A similar but fuller account of
the West African creed is given by a German writer, whose
statements apply particularly to the Ewe-speaking negroes
of the Slave Coast. He says: <q>Thus the term fetishism
denotes the attitude of the Ewes, or of West African negro
tribes in general, towards magic; it forms one of the principal
constituents of their religion. The other main constituent
is their attitude to the gods, which is properly
demonolatry. The Ewe names the gods <foreign rend='italic'>drowo</foreign>, that is,
intermediaries, namely, between a Supreme Being, whom he
calls <foreign rend='italic'>Mawu</foreign> (<q>the Unsurpassable</q>), and mankind. The
drowo with whom the Ewe has to do, to whom his offerings
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
and his respects are paid, are thus subordinate deities, who
according to the etymological meaning of the word <foreign rend='italic'>dro</foreign> are
conceived as judging, composing disputes, and mediating
among men. The existence of a Supreme Being is by no
means unfamiliar to the Ewe; he has his <foreign rend='italic'>Mawu</foreign> often in
his mouth, especially in talking with the missionary, and he
willingly acknowledges that <foreign rend='italic'>Mawu</foreign> created him and the
gods. But he can only conceive of this Supreme Being on
the analogy of his own personality and not as omnipresent and
so forth. It is impossible that this Mawu can trouble himself
about details in the creation or even about every individual
man and his petty affairs; what would be the use of the
many higher and lower spirits with which the world is filled
before his eyes? The West African perhaps conceives of
God as transcendant, but not as immanent; a creation he
possibly apprehends, but not an omnipresent government of
the world by the Supreme Being. That government is
carried on by Mawu at a distance by means of the many
spirits or subordinate gods whom he has created for the
purpose.... A portion of the gods fills the air, wherefore
the forces and the phenomena of nature are deified as their
manifestations. The elements are thought to be moved by
the gods of the air. In the storm and the wind, in thunder
and lightning the Ewe sees the manifestation of particularly
powerful gods. In the mysterious roll and roar of the deep
sea the Ewe, like the negro in general, beholds the sway of
a very mighty god or of a whole host of gods. Further, the
earth itself is also the abode of a multitude of spirits or
gods, who have in it their sphere of activity. They inhabit
certain great mountains, great hollow trees, caves, rivers, and
especially woods. In such woods of the gods no timber
may be felled. Thus the gods fill not only the air and the
sea, they also walk on earth, on all paths; they lurk under
the trees, they terrify the lonely wayfarer, they disquiet and
plague even the sleeper. When the negro rises from the
stool on which he has been sitting, he never fails to turn it
upside down, to prevent a spirit from sitting down on it....
The spirit-world falls into two main classes: there are
good and kindly spirits, whose help is eagerly sought by
offerings; but there are also gloomy and revengeful spirits,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
whose approach and influence people eagerly endeavour to
avert, and against whom all possible means are employed to
ban them from the houses and villages. The people are
much more zealous in their devotion to the evil spirits than
in their devotion to the good. The reason is that the feeling
of fear and the consciousness of guilt are much stronger
than the emotions of love and gratitude for benefits received.
Hence the worship of the false gods or spirits among this
people, and among the West African negro tribes in general,
is properly speaking a worship of demons or devils.</q><note place='foot'>G. Zündel, <q>Land und Volk der
Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in Westafrika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für
Erdkunde zu Berlin</hi>, xii. (1877) pp.
412-414. Full details as to the religious
creed of the Ewes, including
their belief in a Supreme Being (<foreign rend='italic'>Mawu</foreign>),
are given, to a great extent in the
words of the natives themselves, by
the German missionary Jakob Spieth
in his elaborate and valuable works
<hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin, 1906) and
<hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der Eweer in Süd-Togo</hi>
(Leipsic, 1911). As to <foreign rend='italic'>Mawu</foreign> in
particular, the meaning of whose name
is somewhat uncertain, see J. Spieth,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, pp. 421 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Die
Religion der Eweer in Süd-Togo</hi>, pp.
15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons on
the Congo. Demons
in South
Africa.</note>
Again, a missionary who spent fifteen years among
the Boloki of the Upper Congo River tells us that <q>the
religion of the Boloki has its basis in their fear of those
numerous invisible spirits which surround them on every
side, and are constantly trying to compass their sickness,
misfortune and death; and the Boloki's sole object in
practising their religion is to cajole, or appease, cheat, or
conquer and kill those spirits that trouble them&mdash;hence their
<foreign rend='italic'>nganga</foreign> [medicine-men], their rites, their ceremonies and their
charms. If there were no evil spirits to be circumvented
there would be no need of their medicine men and their
charms.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Anthropological
Notes on the Bangala of the
Upper Congo River,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xl.
(1910) p. 377.</note> <q>The Boloki folk believe they are surrounded by
spirits which try to thwart them at every twist and turn, and
to harm them every hour of the day and night. The rivers
and creeks are crowded with the spirits of their ancestors,
and the forests and bush are full also of spirits, ever seeking
to injure the living who are overtaken by night when
travelling by road or canoe. I never met among them a
man daring enough to go at night through the forest that
divided Monsembe from the upper villages, even though a
large reward was offered. Their invariable reply was: <q>There
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
are too many spirits in the bush and forest.</q></q><note place='foot'>Rev. John H. Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>Among
Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), p.
261.</note> The spirits
which these people dread so much are the <foreign rend='italic'>mingoli</foreign> or
disembodied souls of the dead; the life of the Boloki is
described as <q>one long drawn out fear of what the <foreign rend='italic'>mingoli</foreign>
may next do to them.</q> These dangerous beings dwell
everywhere, land and water are full of them; they are ever
ready to pounce on the living and carry them away or to
smite them with disease and kill them. Though they are
invisible to common eyes, the medicine-man can see them,
and can cork them up in calabashes or cover them up with
saucepans; indeed, if it is made worth his while, he can
even destroy them altogether.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Anthropological
Notes on the Bangala of the
Upper Congo River,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xl.
(1910) pp. 368, 370. The singular
form of <foreign rend='italic'>mingoli</foreign> is <foreign rend='italic'>mongoli</foreign>, <q>a disembodied
spirit.</q> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Among
Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), p.
252; and again <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 275. But great
as is the fear of evil spirits among the
natives of the Congo, their dread of
witchcraft seems to be still more intense.
See Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Notes
on some Customs of the Lower Congo
People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xx. (1909) pp. 51
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>The belief in witchcraft affects
their lives in a vast number of ways,
and touches them socially at a hundred
different points. It regulates their
actions, modifies their mode of thought
and speech, controls their conduct towards
each other, causes cruelty and
callousness in a people not naturally
cruel, and sets the various members of
a family against each other. A man
may believe any theory he likes about
creation, about God, and about the
abode of departed spirits, but he must
believe in witches and their influence
for evil, and must in unmistakable
terms give expression to that belief, or
be accused of witchcraft himself....
But for witchcraft no one would die,
and the earnest longing of all right-minded
men and women is to clear it
out of the country by killing every
discovered witch. It is an act of self-preservation....
Belief in witches
is interwoved into the very fibre of
every Bantu-speaking man and woman,
and the person who does not believe
in them is a monster, a witch, to be
killed as soon as possible.</q> Could we
weigh against each other the two great
terrors which beset the minds of savages
all over the world, it seems probable
that the dread of witches would be
found far to outweigh the dread of evil
spirits. However, it is the fear of evil
spirits with which we are at present
concerned.</note> Again, of the Bantu tribes
of South Africa we read that <q>nearer than the spirits of
deceased chiefs or of their own ancestors was a whole host
of hobgoblins, water sprites, and malevolent demons, who
met the Bantu turn which way they would. There was no
beautiful fairyland for them, for all the beings who haunted
the mountains, the plains, and the rivers were ministers of
evil. The most feared of these was a large bird that made
love to women and incited those who returned its affection
to cause the death of those who did not, and a little mischievous
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
imp who was also amorously inclined. Many
instances could be gathered from the records of magistrates'
courts in recent years of demented women having admitted
their acquaintance with these fabulous creatures, as well as
of whole communities living in terror of them.</q><note place='foot'>G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Records of South-Eastern
Africa</hi>, vii. (1901) pp. 405
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> However,
it would be no doubt a great mistake to imagine that the
minds of the Bantu, or indeed of any savages, are perpetually
occupied by a dread of evil spirits;<note place='foot'>On this subject Mr. Dudley Kidd
has made some judicious observations
(<hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>, London, 1906, pp.
131 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). He says: <q>The Kafirs certainly
do not live in everlasting dread
of spirits, for the chief part of their
life is not spent in thinking at all. A
merrier set of people it would be hard
to find. They are so easy-going that
it would seem to them too much burden
to be for ever thinking of spirits.</q></note> the savage and
indeed the civilized man is incapable, at least in his normal
state, of such excessive preoccupation with a single idea,
which, if prolonged, could hardly fail to end in insanity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in South
America.</note>
Speaking of the spirits which the Indians of Guiana
attribute to all objects in nature, Sir Everard F. im Thurn
observes that <q>the whole world of the Indian swarms with
these beings. If by a mighty mental effort we could for a
moment revert to a similar mental position, we should find
ourselves everywhere surrounded by a host of possibly hurtful
beings, so many in number that to describe them as
innumerable would fall ridiculously short of the truth. It is
not therefore wonderful that the Indian fears to move beyond
the light of his camp-fire after dark, or, if he is obliged to do
so, carries a fire-brand with him that he may at least see
among what enemies he walks; nor is it wonderful that
occasionally the air round the settlement seems to the Indian
to grow so full of beings, that a peaiman [sorcerer], who is
supposed to have the power of temporarily driving them
away, is employed to effect a general clearance of these
beings, if only for a time. That is the main belief, of
the kind that is generally called religious, of the Indians
of Guiana.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the
Indians of Guiana</hi>. (London, 1883),
pp. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the dread which
the Brazilian Indians entertain of
demons, see J. B. von Spix and C.
F. Ph. von Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in Brasilien</hi>
(Munich, 1823-1831), iii. 1108-1111.</note> The Lengua Indians of the Paraguayan
Chaco believe in certain demons which they call <foreign rend='italic'>kilyikhama</foreign>.
<q>The <foreign rend='italic'>kilyikhama</foreign> are confined to no particular
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
place. Time and distance do not seem to affect them in
the least. They are held in great awe by the Indian, and
whithersoever he turns, whether by day or night, but particularly
at night, he is subject to their malign influences....
They live in constant dread of these supernatural beings,
and if nothing else contributed to make their life miserable,
this ever-present dread of the <foreign rend='italic'>kilyikhama</foreign> would be in itself
quite sufficient to rob it of most of its joy.</q><note place='foot'>W. Barbrooke Grubb, <hi rend='italic'>An Unknown People in an Unknown Land</hi> (London,
1911), pp. 118, 119.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons in
Labrador.</note>
Very different from the life of these Indians of the South
American forests and prairies is the life of the Esquimaux
on the desolate shores of Labrador; yet they too live in
like bondage to the evil creatures of their own imagination.
<q>All the affairs of life are supposed to be under the control
of spirits, each of which rules over a certain element, and all
of which are under the direction of a greater spirit. Each
person is supposed to be attended by a special guardian
who is malignant in character, ever ready to seize upon the
least occasion to work harm upon the individual whom it
accompanies. As this is an evil spirit, its good offices and
assistance can be obtained by propitiation only. The person
strives to keep the good-will of the evil spirit by offerings of
food, water, and clothing.</q> <q>Besides this class of spirits,
there are the spirits of the sea, the land, the sky (for be it
understood that the Eskimo know nothing of the air), the
winds, the clouds, and everything in nature. Every cove of
the sea-shore, every point, island, and prominent rock has its
guardian spirit. All are of the malignant type, and to be
propitiated only by acceptable offerings from persons who
desire to visit the locality where it is supposed to reside.
Of course some of the spirits are more powerful than others,
and these are more to be dreaded than those able to inflict
less harm. These minor spirits are under the control of the
great spirit, whose name is Tung ak. This one great spirit
is more powerful than all the rest besides. The lesser spirits
are immediately under his control and ever ready to obey
his command. The shaman (or conjuror) alone is supposed
to be able to deal with the Tung ak. While the shaman
does not profess to be superior to the Tung ak, he is able to
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
enlist his assistance and thus be able to control all the
undertakings his profession may call for. This Tung ak is
nothing more or less than death, which ever seeks to torment
and harass the lives of people that their spirits may go to
dwell with him.</q><note place='foot'>L. M. Turner, <q>Ethnology of the
Ungava District, Hudson Bay Territory,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1894), pp. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons in
Polynesia. Demons
in New
Zealand.</note>
Brighter at first sight and more pleasing is the mythology
of the islanders of the Pacific, as the picture of it is drawn
for us by one who seems to have felt the charm of those
beliefs which it was his mission to destroy. <q>By their rude
mythology,</q> he says, <q rend='pre'>each lovely island was made a sort of
fairy-land, and the spells of enchantment were thrown over
its varied scenes. The sentiment of the poet that</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth,</hi></q></q></l>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep</hi>,</q></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q rend='post'>was one familiar to their minds; and it is impossible not to
feel interested in a people who were accustomed to consider
themselves surrounded by invisible intelligences, and who
recognized in the rising sun&mdash;the mild and silver moon&mdash;the
shooting star&mdash;the meteor's transient flame&mdash;the ocean's
roar&mdash;the tempest's blast, or the evening breeze&mdash;the movements
of mighty spirits. The mountain's summit, and the
fleecy mists that hang upon its brows&mdash;the rocky defile&mdash;the
foaming cataract&mdash;and the lonely dell&mdash;were all regarded
as the abode or resort of these invisible beings.</q><note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836),
i. 331.</note> Yet the
spiritual powers which compassed the life of the islanders on
every side appear to have been far from friendly to man.
Speaking of their beliefs touching the souls of the dead, the
same writer says that the Polynesians <q>imagined they lived
in a world of spirits, which surrounded them night and day,
watching every action of their lives, and ready to avenge the
slightest neglect or the least disobedience to their injunctions,
as proclaimed by their priests. These dreaded beings
were seldom thought to resort to the habitations of men on
errands of benevolence.</q><note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 406.</note> The Tahitians, when they were
visited by Captain Cook, believed that <q>sudden deaths and
all other accidents are effected by the immediate action of
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
some divinity. If a man only stumble against a stone and
hurt his toe, they impute it to an <foreign rend='italic'>Eatooa</foreign>; so that they may
be literally said, agreeably to their system, to tread enchanted
ground.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Voyages of Captain James
Cook round the World</hi> (London, 1809),
vi. 152.</note> <q>The Maori gods,</q> says a well-informed writer,
<q>were demons, whose evil designs could only be counteracted
by powerful spells and charms; these proving effectual,
sacrifices and offerings were made to soothe the vanquished
spirits and appease their wrath.</q> <q>The gods in general
appeared in the whirlwind and lightning, answering their
votaries in the clap of thunder. The inferior beings made
themselves visible in the form of lizards, moths, butterflies,
spiders, and even flies; when they spoke it was in a low
whistling tone. They were supposed to be so numerous as
to surround the living in crowds, <foreign rend='italic'>kei te muia nga wairua
penei nga wairoa</foreign>, <q>the spirits throng like mosquitoes,</q> ever
watching to inflict evil.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1870), p.
104.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons in
the Pelew
Islands.</note>
Again, we are informed that the popular religion of the
Pelew Islanders <q>has reference to the gods (<foreign rend='italic'>kaliths</foreign>) who
may be useful or harmful to men in all their doings. Their
imagination peoples the sea, the wood, the earth with numerous
gods, and whatever a man undertakes, be it to catch
fish or fell a tree, he must first propitiate the deities, or
rather guard himself against their spiteful anger, which can
only be done by means of certain spells and incantations.
The knowledge of these incantations is limited to a very
few persons, and forms in fact the secret of the arts and
industries which are plied in the islands. A master of his
craft is not he who can build a good house or a faultless
canoe, but he who possesses the <foreign rend='italic'>golay</foreign> or magic power to
ban the tree-gods, that they may not prove hurtful to the
workmen and to the people who afterwards use the things.
All these gods of the earth, the woods, the mountains, the
brooks are very mischievous and dangerous, and most diseases
are caused by them. Hence the persons who possess
the magic power are dreaded, frequently employed, and well
paid; but in extreme cases they are regarded as sorcerers
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
and treated accordingly. If one of them builds a house for
somebody and is dissatisfied with his remuneration, he stirs
up the tree-god to avenge him. So the inhabitants of the
house he has built fall sick, and if help is not forthcoming
they die.</q><note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin,
1888), i. 46.</note> Of the Mortlock Islanders we are told that
<q>their imagination peopled the whole of nature with spirits
and deities, of whom the number was past finding out.</q><note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Bewohner der
Mortlock-Inseln,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der
geographischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg</hi>,
1878-79, p. 36.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in the
Philippines and in
Melanesia.</note>
Speaking of the natives of the Philippine Islands a
writer observes that <q>the basis of all the superstitious beliefs
of the Negritos, what might else be termed their religion, is
the constant presence of the spirits of the dead near where
they lived when alive. All places are inhabited by the
spirits. All adverse circumstances, sickness, failure of crops,
unsuccessful hunts, are attributed to them.</q><note place='foot'>W. A. Reed, <hi rend='italic'>Negritos of Zambales</hi>
(Manilla, 1904), p. 65 (<hi rend='italic'>Ethnological
Survey Publications</hi>, vol. ii. Part i.).</note> As to the
Melanesians of New Britain we read that <q>another deeply
rooted belief which exercises an extraordinary influence on the
life and customs of these people is a belief in demons. To
their thinking the demons, <foreign rend='italic'>tambaran</foreign> (a word synonymous
with <q>poor wretch,</q> <q>sufferer</q>) are spirits entirely perverse,
deceitful, maleficent, and ceaselessly occupied in injuring us.
Diseases, death, the perturbations of nature, all unfortunate
events are imputed to them. The demons exist in legions;
they live everywhere, especially in the forests, desert places,
and the depths of the sea.</q><note place='foot'>Mgr. Couppé <q>En Nouvelle-Poméranie,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxiii. (1891) pp. 355 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The beliefs and customs of one
particular tribe of this great island&mdash;the Livuans, who
occupy the eastern coast of the Gazelle Peninsula in New
Britain&mdash;have been described by a Catholic missionary in
similar terms. <q>The distrustful natives,</q> he tells us, <q>have
not attained to a belief in a beneficent, compassionate deity.
All the more numerous, however, are the evil spirits with
which they people the universe. These are legion. The
power which the natives ascribe to these spirits extends not
merely to the property of mankind but also to life and death.
The Livuan always believes that he can trace the pernicious
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
influence of these <foreign rend='italic'>tambaran</foreign> (devils) on his actions. In his
conviction, the whole thoughts and endeavours of the evil
spirits have no other object than to injure men in every
possible way. This dismal, comfortless superstition weighs
heavy on the native.</q><note place='foot'>P. A. Kleintitschen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner
der Gazellehalbinsel</hi> (Hiltrup
bei Münster, preface dated 1906), pp.
336 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Joachim Graf Pfeil,
<hi rend='italic'>Studien und Beobachtungen aus der
Südsee</hi> (Brunswick, 1899), p. 159; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxvii. (1898) pp. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, another writer who lived
for thirty years among the Melanesians of the Bismarck
Archipelago, of which New Britain forms part, observes
that <q>we often find the view expressed that the native is a
being who lives only for the day, without cares of any kind.
The view is very erroneous, for in fact he leads a life which is
plagued by cares of all sorts. Amongst the greatest plagues
of his life is his bottomless superstition. He sees himself
surrounded at every step by evil spirits and their influences.
He trusts nobody, for who knows whether his nearest neighbour,
his professedly best friend, is not plotting to bring
trouble, sickness, and even death on him by means of magic?
Everywhere he sees snares set for him, everywhere he scents
treachery and guile. We need not wonder, therefore, that
mistrust is a leading feature in the character not only of the
New Britons, but of the Melanesians generally.... The
native is simply not accessible to rational motives. The
only motive he understands is sorcery on the part of malicious
men or the influence of evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in
der Südsee</hi> (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 120,
121.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Dutch
New
Guinea and
German
New
Guinea.</note>
A Dutch missionary, who spent twenty-five years among
the natives of Dutch New Guinea, tells us that <q>in their
ignorance of a living God the Papuans people earth and
air, land and sea with mysterious malignant powers, which
take up their abode in stones and trees or in men and
cause all kinds of misfortunes, especially sickness and death.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. van Hasselt, <q>Die Papuastämme
an der Geelvinkbai (Neu-guinea),</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der Geographischen
Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>, ix. (1891)
p. 98. As to Mr. van Hasselt's twenty-five
years' residence among these savages,
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. 22.</note>
Again, speaking of the Bukaua, a tribe of German New
Guinea, a German missionary writes that <q>the Bukaua knows
himself to be surrounded by spirits (<foreign rend='italic'>balum</foreign>) at every step.
An insight into the life and mode of thought of the natives,
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
as the latter is expressed especially in their stories, confirms
this view completely. What wonder that the fear of spirits
dominates the whole existence of the Bukaua and causes
him to tremble even in the hour of death? There are spirits
of the beach, the water, the fields, the forests, spirits that
reside in the villages and particular places, and a sort of
vagabonds, who can take up their abode even in lifeless
things.</q> Then after describing the demons of the beach, the
water, and the field, the writer proceeds as follows: <q>Of
forest spirits the number is infinite; for it is above all in the
mysterious darkness, the tangled wildernesses of the virgin
forest that the spirits love to dwell. They hold their meetings
in what are called evil places. They are never bent on
good. Especially at nightfall the native fancies he hears
the voice of the spirits in the hum and chirping of the insects
in the forest. They lure hunting dogs from the trail. They
make wild boars rabid; in the form of snakes they make
inroads into human dwellings; they drive men crazy or into
fits; they play roguish tricks of all sorts.</q><note place='foot'>Stefan Lehner, <q>Bukaua,</q> in R. Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(Berlin, 1911) pp. 414-416.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in British
New
Guinea.</note>
Among the tribes who inhabit the south-eastern coasts
of New Guinea <q>a death in a village is the occasion of
bringing plenty of ghosts to escort their new companion,
and perhaps fetch some one else. All night the friends of
the deceased sit up and keep the drums going to drive away
the spirits. When I was sleeping one night at Hood Bay,
a party of young men and boys came round with sticks,
striking the fences and posts of houses all through the
village. This I found was always done when any one died,
to drive back the spirits to their own quarters on the
adjacent mountain tops. But it is the spirits of the inland
tribes, the aborigines of the country, that the coast tribes
most fear. The road from the interior to Port Moresby
passed close to our house, and the natives told us that the
barking of our English dog at night had frightened the evil
spirits so effectually that they had had no ghostly visitors
since we came. I was camping out one night in the bush
with some coast natives, at a time when a number of the
natives of the interior were hunting in the neighbourhood;
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
noticing that the men with me did not go to sleep, I asked
if they were afraid of the mountain men. <q>No,</q> they replied,
<q>but the whole plain is full of the spirits who come with
them.</q> All calamities are attributed to the power and
malice of these evil spirits. Drought and famine, storm and
flood, disease and death are all supposed to be brought by
<q>Vata</q> and his hosts.</q><note place='foot'>W. G. Lawes, <q>Notes on New
Guinea and its Inhabitants,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the Royal Geographical Society</hi>,
1880, p. 615.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Timor and Celebes.</note>
The inhabitants of Timor, an island to the south-west of
New Guinea, revere the lord of heaven, the sun, the mistress
of the earth, and the spirits of the dead. <q>These last dwell,
some with the mistress of the earth under ground, others on
graves, others in stones and springs and woods, some on
mountains and some in the habitations of their kinsfolk,
where they take up their abode in the middle of the principal
post of the house or in copper cymbals, in swords and pikes.
Others again assume the shape of pigs and deer and bees;
men who have fallen in battle love especially to turn into
bees, that they may roam over the earth at will. The
ghosts who reside with the mistress of the earth are male
and female, and their offspring swarm by myriads in the
air, so that the people think you cannot stir without striking
against one of them. According to their whim of the
moment the ghosts are good or bad.</q> <q>All diseases which
are not due to infection or transmitted by inheritance are
ascribed to the mistress of the earth, to the ghosts, and to
their wicked offspring, who inflict them as punishments for
insults and injuries, for insufficient food, for the killing of
deer and of wild pigs, in which the ghosts take up their
abode temporarily, and also for the sale of cymbals, swords
and pikes, in which a ghost had settled.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Die Landschaft
Dawan oder West-Timor,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
geographische Blätter</hi>, x. 278 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The natives of
Amboyna think that <q>woods, mountains, trees, stones,
indeed the whole universe, is inhabited by a multitude of
spirits, of whom many are the souls of the dead.</q><note place='foot'>G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell,
<hi rend='italic'>Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de Oeliasers</hi>
(Dordrecht, 1875), p. 148.</note> In
Bolang Mongondo, a district of Celebes, <q>all calamities, great
and small, of whatever kind, and by whatever name they are
called, that befall men and animals, villages, gardens and so
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
forth, are attributed to evil or angry spirits. The superstition
is indescribably great. The smallest wound, the least indisposition,
the most trifling adversity in the field, at the fishing,
on a journey or what not, is believed by the natives to
be traceable to the anger of their ancestors. The superstition
cripples every effort to remedy the calamities except
by sacrifice. There is perhaps no country the inhabitants of
which know so little about simples as Bolang Mongondo.
What a native of Bolang Mongondo calls medicine is nothing
but sacrifice, magic, and talismans. And the method of
curing a sick man always consists in the use of magic, or in
the propitiation of angry ancestral spirits by means of
offerings, or in the banishment of evil spirits. The application
of one or other of these three methods depends again
on the decision of the sorcerer, who plays a great part in
every case of sickness.</q><note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Het heidendom en de Islam in
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 259.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons in
Bali and
Java.</note>
In the island of Bali <q>all the attention paid to the sick
has its root solely in the excessive superstition of these
islanders, which leads them to impute every unpleasantness
in life, every adversity to the influence of evil spirits or of
men who are in some way in league with them. The belief
in witches and wizards is everywhere great in the Indies, but
perhaps nowhere is it so universal and so strong as in Bali.</q><note place='foot'>R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het
eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, August, 1880, p. 83.</note>
In Java, we are told, it is not merely great shady trees that
are believed to be the abode of spirits. <q>In other places also,
where the vital energy of nature manifests itself strikingly
and impressively, a feeling of veneration is stirred, as on the
sea-shore, in deep woods, on steep mountain sides. All such
spots are supposed to be the abode of spirits of various
kinds, whose mighty power is regarded with reverence and
awe, whose anger is dreaded, and whose favour is hoped for.
But wherever they dwell, whether in scenes of loveliness
that move the heart, or in spots that affect the mind with
fright and horror, the nature and disposition of these spirits
appear not to differ. They are a source of fear and anxiety
in the one case just as much as in the other. To none of them
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
did I ever hear moral qualities ascribed. They are mighty,
they are potentates, and therefore it is well with him who has
their favour and ill with him who has it not; this holds true
of them all.</q> <q>The number of the spirits is innumerable
and inconceivable. All the phenomena of nature, which we
trace to fixed laws and constant forces, are supposed by the
Javanese to be wrought by spirits.</q><note place='foot'>S. E. Harthoorn, <q>De Zending
op Java en meer bepaald die van
Malang,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
iv. (1860) pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons in
Borneo and Sumatra.</note>
The natives of the valley of the Barito in Borneo hold
that <q>the air is filled with countless <foreign rend='italic'>hantoes</foreign> (spirits). Every
object has such a spirit which watches over it and seeks to
defend it from danger. It is these spirits especially that
bring sickness and misfortune on men, and for that reason
offerings are often made to them and also to the powerful
<foreign rend='italic'>Sangsangs</foreign> (angels), whereas the supreme God, the original
fountain of all good, is neglected.</q><note place='foot'>C. A. L. M. Schwaner, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo,
Beschrijving van het stroomgebied van
den Barito</hi> (Amsterdam, 1853-54), i.
176.</note> Of the Battas or Bataks
of Sumatra we are told that <q>the key-note of their religious
mood is fear of the unknown powers, a childish feeling of
dependence, the outcome of a belief in supernatural influences
to which man is constantly exposed, in wonders and witchcraft,
which hamper his free action. They feel themselves
continually surrounded by unseen beings and dependent on
them for everything.</q> <q>Every misfortune bespeaks the ill-will
of the hostile spirits. The whole world is a meeting-place
of demons, and most of the phenomena of nature
are an expression of their power. The only means of
remedying or counteracting their baleful influence is to
drive away the spirits by means of certain words, as well
as by the use of amulets and the offering of sacrifices
to the guardian spirits.</q><note place='foot'>J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane- en
Bila-stroomgebied,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, iii. Afdeeling,
meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2
(Amsterdam, 1886), p. 287.</note> To the same effect another
authority on the religion of the Battas remarks that <q>the
common man has only a very dim and misty notion of
his triune god, and troubles himself far more about the
legions of spirits which people the whole world around
him, and against which he must always be protected by
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
magic spells.</q><note place='foot'>B. Hagen, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Battareligion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxviii. (1883) p. 508. The persons
of the Batta Trinity are Bataraguru,
Sori, and Balabulan. The most fundamental
distinction between the persons
of the Trinity appears to be that one of
them is allowed to eat pork, while the
others are not (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 505).</note> Again, speaking of the same people,
a Dutch missionary observes that <q>if there is still any
adherent of Rousseau's superficial theories about the idyllically
happy and careless life of people <q>in a state of nature,</q>
he ought to come and spend a little time among the Bataks
and keep his eyes and ears open. He would soon be convinced
of the hollowness and falsehood of these phrases and
would learn to feel a deep compassion for human beings
living in perpetual fear of evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>M. Joustra, <q>Het leven, de zeden
en gewoonten der Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlvi. (1902) p.
412.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in the
Nicobars, in
the Malay
Peninsula, and
in Kamtchatka..</note>
The religion of the Nicobar Islanders <q>is an undisguised
animism, and the whole of their very frequent and elaborate
ceremonies and festivals are aimed at exorcising and scaring
spirits (<q>devils,</q> as they have been taught to call them).
Fear of spirits and ghosts (<foreign rend='italic'>iwi</foreign>) is the guide to all ceremonies,
and the life of the people is <emph>very</emph> largely taken up with
ceremonials and feasts of all kinds. These are usually held
at night, and whether directly religious or merely convivial,
seem all to have an origin in the overmastering fear of spirits
that possesses the Nicobarese. It has so far proved ineradicable,
for two centuries of varied and almost continuous
missionary effort has had no appreciable effect on it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Census of India, 1901</hi>, vol. iii.
<hi rend='italic'>The Andaman and Nicobar Islands</hi>,
by Lieut.-Colonel Sir Richard C.
Temple (Calcutta, 1903), p. 206.</note>
The Mantras, an aboriginal race of the Malay Peninsula,
<q>find or put a spirit everywhere, in the air they breathe, in
the land they cultivate, in the forests they inhabit, in the
trees they cut down, in the caves of the rocks. According
to them, the demon is the cause of everything that turns out
ill. If they are sick, a demon is at the bottom of it; if an
accident happens, it is still the spirit who is at work; thereupon
the demon takes the name of the particular evil of
which he is supposed to be the cause. Hence the demon
being assumed as the author of every ill, all their superstitions
resolve themselves into enchantments and spells to
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
appease the evil spirit, to render mild and tractable the
fiercest beasts.</q><note place='foot'>Borie, <q>Notice sur les Mantras,
tribu sauvage de la péninsule Malaise,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, x. (1860) p. 434.</note> To the mind of the Kamtchatkan every
corner of earth and heaven seemed full of spirits, whom he
revered and dreaded more than God.<note place='foot'>S. Krascheninnikow, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
des Landes Kamtschatka</hi> (Lemgo, 1766),
p. 215.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in India.
The high
gods come
and go, but
demons
remain.</note>
In India from the earliest times down to the present day
the real religion of the common folk appears always to have
been a belief in a vast multitude of spirits, of whom many,
if not most, are mischievous and harmful. As in Europe
beneath a superficial layer of Christianity a faith in magic
and witchcraft, in ghosts and goblins has always survived
and even flourished among the weak and ignorant, so it has
been and so it is in the East. Brahmanism, Buddhism,
Islam may come and go, but the belief in magic and demons
remains unshaken through them all, and, if we may judge
of the future from the past, is likely to survive the rise
and fall of other historical religions. For the great faiths
of the world, just in so far as they are the outcome of
superior intelligence, of purer morality, of extraordinary
fervour of aspiration after the ideal, fail to touch and move
the common man. They make claims upon his intellect
and his heart to which neither the one nor the other is
capable of responding. The philosophy they teach is too
abstract, the morality they inculcate too exalted for him.
The keener minds embrace the new philosophy, the more
generous spirits are fired by the new morality; and as the
world is led by such men, their faith sooner or later becomes
the professed faith of the multitude. Yet with the common
herd, who compose the great bulk of every people, the new
religion is accepted only in outward show, because it is
impressed upon them by their natural leaders whom they
cannot choose but follow. They yield a dull assent to
it with their lips, but in their heart they never really
abandon their old superstitions; in these they cherish a
faith such as they cannot repose in the creed which they
nominally profess; and to these, in the trials and emergencies
of life, they have recourse as to infallible remedies,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
when the promises of the higher faith have failed them,
as indeed such promises are apt to do.<note place='foot'>We may compare the instructive
remarks made by Mr. W. E. Maxwell
on the stratification of religious beliefs
among the Malays (<q>The Folk-lore of
the Malays,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>,
No. 7, June, 1881, pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). He
says: <q>Two successive religious changes
have taken place among them, and when
we have succeeded in identifying the
vestiges of Brahmanism which underly
the external forms of the faith of Muhammed,
long established in all Malay
kingdoms, we are only half-way through
our task. There yet remain the powerful
influences of the still earlier indigenous
faith to be noted and accounted
for. Just as the Buddhists of Ceylon
turn, in times of sickness and danger,
not to the consolations offered by the
creed of Buddha, but to the propitiation
of the demons feared and reverenced
by their early progenitors, and
just as the Burmese and Talaings,
though Buddhists, retain in full force
the whole of the <foreign rend='italic'>Nat</foreign> superstition, so
among the Malays, in spite of centuries
which have passed since the establishment
of an alien worship, the Muhammedan
peasant may be found invoking
the protection of Hindu gods against
the spirits of evil with which his primitive
faith has peopled all natural
objects.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in ancient
India.</note>
To establish for India in particular the truth of the propositions
which I have just advanced, it may be enough to
cite the evidence of two writers of high authority, one
of whom deals with the most ancient form of Indian religion
known to us, while the other describes the popular religion
of the Hindoos at the present day. <q>According to the
creed of the Vedic ages,</q> says Professor Oldenberg, <q>the
whole world in which man lives is animated. Sky and
earth, mountain, forest, trees and beasts, the earthly water
and the heavenly water of the clouds,&mdash;all is filled with
living spiritual beings, who are either friendly or hostile to
mankind. Unseen or embodied in visible form, hosts of
spirits surround and hover about human habitations,&mdash;bestial
or misshapen goblins, souls of dead friends and souls
of foes, sometimes as kindly guardians, oftener as mischief-makers,
bringing disease and misfortune, sucking the blood
and strength of the living. A soul is attributed even to the
object fashioned by human hands, whose functions are felt
to be friendly or hostile. The warrior pays his devotion to
the divine war-chariot, the divine arrow, the drum; the
ploughman to the ploughshare; the gambler to the dice;
the sacrificer, about whom naturally we have the most exact
information, reveres the stone that presses out the juice of
the Soma, the straw on which the gods recline, the post to
which the sacrificial victim is bound, and the divine doors
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
through which the gods come forth to enjoy the sacrifice.
At one time the beings in whose presence man feels himself
are regarded by him as really endowed with souls; at
another time, in harmony with a more advanced conception
of the world, they are imagined as substances or fluids
invested with beneficent or maleficent properties: belief
oscillates to and fro between the one mode of thought and
the other. The art of turning to account the operations of
these animated beings, the play of these substances and
forces, is magic rather than worship in the proper sense
of the word. The foundations of this faith and of this
magic are an inheritance from the remotest past, from a
period, to put it shortly, of shamanistic faith in spirits
and souls, of shamanistic magic. Such a period has been
passed through by the forefathers of the Indo-Germanic race
as well as by other peoples.</q><note place='foot'>H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des
Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in modern
India.</note>
Coming down to the Hindoos of the present day, we
find that their attitude towards the spiritual world is
described as follows by Professor Monier Williams. <q>The
plain fact undoubtedly is that the great majority of the
inhabitants of India are, from the cradle to the burning-ground,
victims of a form of mental disease which is best
expressed by the term demonophobia. They are haunted
and oppressed by a perpetual dread of demons. They are
firmly convinced that evil spirits of all kinds, from malignant
fiends to merely mischievous imps and elves, are ever on the
watch to harm, harass, and torment them, to cause plague,
sickness, famine, and disaster, to impede, injure, and mar
every good work.</q><note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Thought
and Life in India</hi> (London, 1883), pp.
210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Elsewhere the same writer has expressed
the same view somewhat more fully. <q>In fact,</q> he
says, <q>a belief in every kind of demoniacal influence has
always been from the earliest times an essential ingredient in
Hindu religious thought. The idea probably had its origin
in the supposed peopling of the air by spiritual beings&mdash;the
personifications or companions of storm and tempest.
Certainly no one who has ever been brought into close
contact with the Hindus in their own country can doubt the
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
fact that the worship of at least ninety per cent. of the
people of India in the present day is a worship of fear.
Not that the existence of good deities presided over by one
Supreme Being is doubted; but that these deities are
believed to be too absolutely good to need propitiation;
just as in ancient histories of the Slav races, we are told
that they believed in a white god and a black god, but paid
adoration to the last alone, having, as they supposed,
nothing to apprehend from the beneficence of the first
or white deity. The simple truth is that evil of all
kinds, difficulties, dangers and disasters, famines, diseases,
pestilences and death, are thought by an ordinary Hindu
to proceed from demons, or, more properly speaking, from
devils, and from devils alone. These malignant beings
are held, as we have seen, to possess varying degrees of
rank, power, and malevolence. Some aim at destroying
the entire world, and threaten the sovereignty of the
gods themselves. Some delight in killing men, women,
and children, out of a mere thirst for human blood. Some
take a mere mischievous pleasure in tormenting, or revel in
the infliction of sickness, injury, and misfortune. All make
it their business to mar or impede the progress of good
works and useful undertakings.</q><note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 230
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The views here expressed by the
late Professor Monier Williams are
confirmed from personal knowledge
by Mr. E. T. Atkinson, <hi rend='italic'>The Himalayan
Districts of the North-Western
Provinces of India</hi>, ii. (Allahabad,
1884) p. 840.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Bengal,
Assam,
the
Chin Hills
Sikhim,
Tibet,
and
Travancore.</note>
It would be easy but tedious to illustrate in detail this
general account of the dread of demons which prevails
among the inhabitants of India at the present day. A very
few particular statements must suffice. Thus, we are told
that the Oraons, a Dravidian race in Bengal, <q>acknowledge
a Supreme God, adored as Dharmi or Dharmesh, the Holy
One, who is manifest in the sun, and they regard Dharmesh
as a perfectly pure, beneficent being, who created us and
would in his goodness and mercy preserve us, but that his
benevolent designs are thwarted by malignant spirits whom
mortals must propitiate, as Dharmesh cannot or does not
interfere, if the spirit of evil once fastens upon us. It
is, therefore, of no use to pray to Dharmesh or to offer
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
sacrifices to him; so though acknowledged, recognised, and
reverenced, he is neglected, whilst the malignant spirits are
adored.</q> Again, it is said of these Oraons that, <q>as the
sole object of their religious ceremonies is the propitiation of
the demons who are ever thwarting the benevolent intentions
of Dharmesh, they have no notion of a service of thanksgiving.</q>
Once more, after giving a list of Oraon demons,
the same writer goes on: <q>Besides this superstitious dread
of the spirits above named, the Oraon's imagination tremblingly
wanders in a world of ghosts. Every rock, road,
river, and grove is haunted.</q><note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi> (Calcutta, 1872), pp.
256, 257, 258.</note> Again, a missionary who
spent many years among the Kacharis of Assam tells
us that <q>the religion of the Kachári race is distinctly of the
type commonly known as <q>animistic</q> and its underlying principle
is characteristically one of fear or dread. The statement
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Timor fecit deos</foreign> certainly holds good of this people in its widest
and strictest sense; and their religion thus stands in very
marked, not to say violent, contrast with the teaching of the
Faith in Christ. In the typical Kachári village as a rule
neither idol nor place of worship is to be found; but to the
Kachári mind and imagination earth, air, and sky are alike
peopled with a vast number of invisible spiritual beings,
known usually as <foreign rend='italic'>Modai</foreign>, all possessing powers and faculties
far greater than those of man, and almost invariably inclined
to use these powers for malignant and malevolent, rather
than benevolent, purposes. In a certain stage of moral and
spiritual development men are undoubtedly influenced far
more by what they fear than by what they love; and this
truth certainly applies to the Kachári race in the most
unqualified way.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. S. Endle, <hi rend='italic'>The Kacharis</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 33.</note> Again, the Siyins, who inhabit the Chin
Hills of north-eastern India, on the borders of Burma,
<q>say that there is no Supreme God and no other world save
this, which is full of evil spirits who inhabit the fields, infest
the houses, and haunt the jungles. These spirits must be
propitiated or bribed to refrain from doing the particular harm
of which each is capable, for one can destroy crops, another
can make women barren, and a third cause a lizard to enter
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
the stomach and devour the bowels.</q><note place='foot'>Bertram S. Carey and H. N.
Tuck, <hi rend='italic'>The Chin Hills</hi>, i. (Rangoon,
1896) p. 196.</note> <q>Like most mountaineers,
the people of Sikhim and the Tibetans are thorough-going
demon-worshippers. In every nook, path, big tree,
rock, spring, waterfall and lake there lurks a devil; for which
reason few individuals will venture out alone after dark.
The sky, the ground, the house, the field, the country have
each their special demons, and sickness is always attributed
to malign demoniacal influence.</q><note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <q>Demonolatry in
Sikhim Lamaism,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xxiii. (1894) p. 197.</note> <q>Even the purest of all
the Lamaist sects&mdash;the Ge-lug-pa&mdash;are thorough-paced
devil-worshippers, and value Buddhism chiefly because it
gives them the whip-hand over the devils which everywhere
vex humanity with disease and disaster, and whose ferocity
weighs heavily on all.</q><note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>The Buddhism of
Tibet</hi> (London, 1895), p. 152.</note> The Lushais of Assam believe in
a beneficent spirit named Pathian, who made everything but
troubles himself very little about men. Far more important
in ordinary life are the numerous demons (<foreign rend='italic'>huai</foreign>), who inhabit
every stream, mountain, and forest, and are all malignant.
To their agency are ascribed all the illnesses and misfortunes
that afflict humanity, and a Lushai's whole life is spent in
propitiating them. It is the sorcerer (<foreign rend='italic'>puithiam</foreign>) who knows
what demon is causing any particular trouble, and it is he
who can prescribe the sort of sacrifice which will appease
the wrath of the fiend. Every form of sickness is set down
to the influence of some demon or other, and all the tales
about these spiritual foes begin or end with the recurrent
phrase, <q>There was much sickness in our village.</q><note place='foot'>Lt.-Colonel J. Shakespear, <hi rend='italic'>The
Lushei Kuki Clans</hi> (London, 1912),
pp. 61, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 67.</note> In
Travancore <q>the minor superstitions connected with demon-worship
are well-nigh innumerable; they enter into all the
feelings, and are associated with the whole life of these people.
Every disease, accident, or misfortune is attributed to the
agency of the devils, and great caution is exercised to avoid
arousing their fury.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>The Land of
Charity</hi> (London, 1883), p. 207.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Ceylon.</note>
With regard to the inhabitants of Ceylon we are told
that <q>the fiends which they conceive to be hovering around
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
them are without number. Every disease or trouble that
assails them is produced by the immediate agency of the
demons sent to punish them: while, on the other hand,
every blessing or success comes directly from the hands
of the beneficent and supreme God. To screen themselves
from the power of the inferior deities, who are all represented
as wicked spirits, and whose power is by no means
irresistible, they wear amulets of various descriptions; and
employ a variety of charms and spells to ward off the
influence of witchcraft and enchantments by which they
think themselves beset on all sides.</q> <q>It is probable that,
by degrees, intercourse with Europeans will entirely do away
these superstitious fears, as the Cinglese of the towns
have already made considerable progress in subduing their
gloomy apprehensions. Not so the poor wretched peasants
who inhabit the more mountainous parts of the country, and
live at a distance from our settlements. These unhappy
people have never for a moment their minds free from
the terror of those demons who seem perpetually to hover
around them. Their imaginations are so disturbed by such
ideas that it is not uncommon to see many driven to madness
from this cause. Several Cinglese lunatics have fallen
under my own observation; and upon inquiring into the
circumstances which had deprived them of their reason,
I universally found that their wretched state was to be
traced solely to the excess of their superstitious fears. The
spirits of the wicked subordinate demons are the chief
objects of fear among the Ceylonese; and impress their
minds with much more awe than the more powerful divinities
who dispense blessings among them. They indeed
think that their country is in a particular manner delivered
over to the dominion of evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>R. Percival, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Island of Ceylon</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1805), pp. 211-213.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Burma.</note>
In Eastern as well as Southern Asia the same view
of nature as pervaded by a multitude of spirits, mostly
mischievous and malignant, has survived the nominal
establishment of a higher faith. <q>In spite of their long
conversion, their sincere belief in, and their pure form of,
Buddhism, which expressly repudiates and forbids such
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
worship, the Burmans and Taleins (or Mons) have in a
great measure kept their ancient spirit or demon worship.
With the Taleins this is more especially the case. Indeed,
with the country population of Pegu the worship, or it
should rather be said the propitiation, of the <q>nats</q> or
spirits, enters into every act of their ordinary life, and
Buddha's doctrine seems kept for sacred days and their
visits to the kyoung (monastery) or to the pagoda.</q><note place='foot'>C. J. F. S. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi>
(London, 1878), pp. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Or,
as another writer puts it, <q>the propitiating of the nats is
a question of daily concern to the lower class Burman,
while the worship at the pagoda is only thought of once
a week. For the nat may prove destructive and hostile at
any time, whereas the acquisition of <foreign rend='italic'>koothoh</foreign> [merit] at the
pagoda is a thing which may be set about in a business-like
way, and at proper and convenient seasons.</q><note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman, his
Life and Notions</hi> (London, 1882), i.
276 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But the term
worship, we are informed, hardly conveys a proper notion of
the attitude of the Burmese towards the nats or spirits.
<q>Even the Karens and Kachins, who have no other form of
belief, do not regard them otherwise than as malevolent
beings who must be looked up to with fear, and propitiated
by regular offerings. They do not want to have anything
to do with the nats; all they seek is to be let alone. The
bamboo pipes of spirit, the bones of sacrificial animals,
the hatchets, swords, spears, bows and arrows that line
the way to a Kachin village, are placed there not with
the idea of attracting the spirits, but of preventing them
from coming right among the houses in search of their
requirements. If they want to drink, the rice spirit has
been poured out, and the bamboo stoup is there in evidence
of the libation; the blood-stained skulls of oxen, pigs,
and the feathers of fowls show that there has been no
stint of meat offerings; should the nats wax quarrelsome,
and wish to fight, there are the axes and dahs with which to
commence the fray. Only let them be grateful, and leave
their trembling worshippers in peace and quietness.</q><note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 278. <q>To
the Burman,</q> says A. Bastian, <q>the
whole world is filled with nats.
Mountains, rivers, waters, the earth,
etc., have all their nat.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Die Völker
des östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 497).</note>
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Siam and Indo-China.</note>
Similarly the Lao or Laosians of Siam, though they are
nominally Buddhists, and have monks and pagodas with
images of Buddha, are said to pay more respect to spirits or
demons than to these idols.<note place='foot'>Mgr. Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Description du
royaume Thai ou Siam</hi> (Paris, 1854),
i. 42.</note> <q>The desire to propitiate the
good spirits and to exorcise the bad ones is the prevailing
influence upon the life of a Laosian. With <foreign rend='italic'>phees</foreign> [evil
spirits] to right of him, to left of him, in front of him,
behind him, all round him, his mind is haunted with a
perpetual desire to make terms with them, and to ensure
the assistance of the great Buddha, so that he may preserve
both body and soul from the hands of the spirits.</q><note place='foot'>C. Bock, <hi rend='italic'>Temples and Elephants</hi>
(London, 1884), p. 198.</note>
<q>Independently of the demons who are in hell, the
Siamese recognise another sort of devils diffused in the
air: they call them <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign>; these are, they say, the demons
who do harm to men and who appear sometimes in horrible
shapes. They put down to the account of these malign
spirits all the calamities which happen in the world. If a
mother has lost a child, it is a <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign> who has done the ill turn;
if a sick man is given over, it is a <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign> that is at the bottom
of it. To appease him, they invoke him and make him
offerings which they hang up in desert places.</q><note place='foot'>Mgr. Bruguière, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de
l'Association de la Propagation de la
Foi</hi>, v. (1831) p. 128.</note> As to the
Thay, a widely spread race of Indo-China,<note place='foot'>J. Deniker, <hi rend='italic'>The Races of Man</hi>
(London, 1900), pp. 400 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> a French
missionary writes as follows: <q>It may be said that the
Thay lives in constant intercourse with the invisible world.
There is hardly an act of his life which is not regulated by
some religious belief. There are two worships, the worship
of the spirits and the worship of the dead, which, however,
are scarcely distinguishable from each other, since the dead
become spirits by the mere fact of their death. His simple
imagination represents to him the world of spirits as a sort
of double of the state of things here below. At the summit
is Po Then, the father of the empyrean. Below him are the
Then&mdash;Then Bun, Then Kum, Then Kom, of whom the
chief is Then Luong, <q>the great Then.</q> The dead go and
cultivate his rice-fields in heaven and clear his mountains,
just as they did their own in their life on earth. He has to
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
wife a goddess Me Bau. Besides these heavenly spirits, the
Thay reckons a multitude of others under the name of <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign>.
His science being not very extensive, many things seem
extraordinary to him. If he cannot explain a certain natural
phenomenon, his perplexity does not last long. It is the
work of a <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign>, he says, and his priests take care not to
dissuade him. Hence he sees spirits everywhere. There
are <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign> on the steep mountains, in the deep woods, the <foreign rend='italic'>phi
bai</foreign> who, by night on the mountain, imitate the rain and the
storms and leave no trace of their passage. If they shew
themselves, they appear in the form of gigantic animals and
cause terrible stomach troubles, such as diarrhœa, dysentery,
and so on.... The large animals of the forest, wild oxen
and buffaloes, rhinoceroses, elephants, and so on, have their
guardian spirits. Hence the prudent hunter learns at the
outset to exorcise them in order that, when he has killed
these animals, he may be able to cut them up and eat their
flesh without having to fear the vengeance of their invisible
guardian. Spirits also guard the clearings whither the deer
come by night to drink. The hunter should sacrifice a fowl
to them from time to time, if he would bring down his game
with ease. The gun itself has a spirit who looks to it that
the powder explodes. In short, the Thay cannot take a
single step without meeting a spirit on the path.</q><note place='foot'>A. Bourlet, <q>Les Thay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, ii. (1907) p. 619.</note> <q>Thus
the life of the Thay seems regulated down to its smallest
details by custom founded on his belief in the spirits. Spirits
perpetually watch him, ready to punish his negligences, and
he is afraid. Fear is not only for him the beginning of
wisdom, it is the whole of his wisdom. Love has only
a very moderate place in it. Even the respect in which he
holds his dead, and the honours which he pays them on
various occasions, seem to be dominated by a superstitious
fear. It seems that the sacrifices which he offers to them
aim rather at averting from himself the evils which he
dreads than at honouring worthily the memory of his
deceased kinsfolk and at paying them the tribute of his
affection and gratitude. Once they sleep their last sleep
yonder in the shadow of the great trees of the forest, none
goes to shed a tear and murmur a prayer on their grave.
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
Nothing but calamity suffices to rescue them from the
oblivion into which they had fallen in the memory of the
living.</q><note place='foot'>A. Bourlet, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 632.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in China.</note>
<q>The dogma, prevailing in China from the earliest times,
that the universe is filled in all its parts with <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>shen</foreign> and <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>kwei</foreign>,
naturally implies that devils and demons must also swarm
about the homes of men in numbers inestimable. It is, in
fact, an axiom which constantly comes out in conversing
with the people, that they haunt every frequented and lonely
spot, and that no place exists where man is safe from
them.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, v. (Leyden, 1907)
p. 470.</note> <q>The worship and propitiation of the gods, which
is the main part of China's religion, has no higher purpose
than that of inducing the gods to protect man against the
world of evil, or, by descending among men, to drive spectres
away by their intimidating presence. This cult implies invocation
of happiness; but as happiness merely means
absence of misfortune which the spectres cause, such a cult
is tantamount to the disarming of spectres by means of the
gods.... Taoism may then actually be defined as Exorcising
Polytheism, a cult of the gods with which Eastern
Asiatic imagination has filled the universe, connected with
a highly developed system of magic, consisting for a great
part in exorcism. This cult and magic is, of course, principally
in the hands of priests. But, besides, the lay world,
enslaved to the intense belief in the perilous omnipresence
of spectres, is engaged every day in a restless defensive and
offensive war against those beings.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vi.
(Leyden, 1910) pp. 930-932. This
sixth volume of Professor de Groot's
great work is mainly devoted to an
account of the ceaseless war waged by
the Chinese people on demons or
spectres (<foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>kwei</foreign>). A more summary
notice of this curious national delusion
will be found in his work <hi rend='italic'>The
Religion of the Chinese</hi> (New York,
1910), chapter ii., <q>The Struggle
against Spectres,</q> pp. 33-61.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in Corea.</note>
In Corea, <q>among the reasons which render the shaman
a necessity are these. In Korean belief, earth, air, and sea
are peopled by demons. They haunt every umbrageous
tree, shady ravine, crystal spring, and mountain crest. On
green hill-slopes, in peaceful agricultural valleys, in grassy
dells, on wooded uplands, by lake and stream, by road and
river, in north, south, east, and west, they abound, making
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
malignant sport of human destinies. They are on every
roof, ceiling, fireplace, <foreign rend='italic'>kang</foreign> and beam. They fill the
chimney, the shed, the living-room, the kitchen&mdash;they are
on every shelf and jar. In thousands they waylay the
traveller as he leaves his home, beside him, behind him,
dancing in front of him, whirring over his head, crying out
upon him from earth, air, and water. They are numbered
by <emph>thousands of billions</emph>, and it has been well said that their
ubiquity is an unholy travesty of the Divine Omnipresence.
This belief, and it seems to be the only one he has, keeps
the Korean in a perpetual state of nervous apprehension, it
surrounds him with indefinite terrors, and it may truly be
said of him that he <q>passes the time of his sojourning here
in fear.</q> Every Korean home is subject to demons, here,
there, and everywhere. They touch the Korean at every
point in life, making his well-being depend on a continual
series of acts of propitiation, and they avenge every omission
with merciless severity, keeping him under this yoke of
bondage from birth to death.</q> <q>Koreans attribute every
ill by which they are afflicted to demoniacal influence. Bad
luck in any transaction, official malevolence, illness, whether
sudden or prolonged, pecuniary misfortune, and loss of
power or position, are due to the malignity of demons. It
is over such evils that the <foreign rend='italic'>Pan-su</foreign> [shaman] is supposed to
have power, and to be able to terminate them by magical
rites, he being possessed by a powerful demon, whose
strength he is able to wield.</q><note place='foot'>Mrs. Bishop (Isabella L. Bird),
<hi rend='italic'>Korea and her Neighbours</hi> (London,
1898), ii. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 229. I have taken
the liberty of changing the writer's
<q>daemon</q> and <q>daemoniacal</q> into
<q>demon</q> and <q>demoniacal.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
among the
Koryaks.</note>
Of the nomadic Koryaks of north-eastern Asia it is said
that <q>all their religious customs have only reference to the
evil spirits of the earth. Their religion is thus a cunning
diplomacy or negotiation with these spirits in order, as far
as possible, to deter them from actions which would be
injurious to men. Everywhere, on every mountain, in the
sea, by the rivers, in the forest, and on the plains their
fancy sees demons lurking, whom they picture to themselves
as purely malignant and very greedy. Hence the frequent
offerings by which they seek to satisfy the greed of these
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
insatiable beings, and to redeem that which they value and
hold dear. Those of the people who are believed to be able
to divine most easily the wishes of the evil ones and who
enjoy their favour to a certain extent are called shamans,
and the religious ceremonies which they perform are
shamanism. In every case the shamans must give their
advice as to how the devils are to be got rid of, and must
reveal the wishes of the demons.</q><note place='foot'>C. von Dittmar, <q>Über die
Koräken und die ihnen sehr nahe
verwandten Tschuktschen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Classe Historico-philologique de
l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de
St. Pétersbourg</hi>, xiii. (1856) coll. 123
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As to these demons of
the earth, who infest the Koryaks, we are told that <q>when
visiting the houses to cause diseases and to kill people, they
enter from under ground, through the hearth-fire, and return
the same way. It happens at times that they steal people,
and carry them away. They are invisible to human beings,
and are capable of changing their size. They are sometimes
so numerous in houses, that they sit on the people, and fill
up all corners. With hammers and axes they knock people
over their heads, thus causing headaches. They bite, and
cause swellings. They shoot invisible arrows, which stick
in the body, causing death, if a shaman does not pull them
out in time. The <foreign rend='italic'>kalau</foreign> [demons] tear out pieces of flesh
from people, thus causing sores and wounds to form on their
bodies.</q><note place='foot'>W. Jochelson, <hi rend='italic'>The Koryak</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1908), p. 28
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
Memoir of the American Museum
of Natural History</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
among the
Gilyaks.</note>
The Gilyaks of the Amoor valley in eastern Asia believe
that besides the gods <q>there are evil supernatural beings
who do him harm. They are devils, called <foreign rend='italic'>mil'k</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>kinr</foreign>.
These beings appear in the most varied forms and are distinguished
according to the degree of their harmfulness.
They appear now in the form of a Gilyak, now in the form
of an animal, from a bear down to a toad and a lizard.
They exist on the land and in the sea, under the earth
and in the sky. Some of them form special tribes of
treacherous beings whose essential nature it is to be
destructive. Others are isolated individuals, ruined beings,
<q>lost sons</q> of families of beneficent beings, who are
exceptional in their hostility to man. The former class
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
are naturally the most dangerous. Some are wholly
occupied in robbing the Gilyak on the road (the spirits of
loss&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>gerniwuch-en</foreign>); others empty his barns, his traps, his
pitfalls, and so on; lastly there are such also, the most
dreadful of all, who lie in wait for his life and bring sickness
and death. Were there no such beings, men would not die.
A natural death is impossible. Death is the result of the
wiles of these treacherous beings.</q><note place='foot'>L. Sternberg, <q>Die Religion der Giljaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
viii. (1905) pp. 460 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in ancient
Babylonia
and
Assyria.</note>
In the more westerly parts of the old world the same
belief in the omnipresence and mischievous power of spirits
has prevailed from antiquity to the present day. If we may
judge from the fragments of their literature which have been
deciphered, few people seem to have suffered more from the
persistent assaults of demons than the ancient Babylonians
and Assyrians, and the evil spirits that preyed on them were
of a peculiarly cruel and malignant sort; even the gods
themselves were not exempt from their attacks. These
baleful beings lurked in solitary places, in graves, in the
shadow of ruins and on the tops of mountains. They dwelt
in the wilderness, in the holes and dens of the earth, they
issued from the lower parts of the ground. Nothing could
resist them in heaven above, nothing could withstand them
on earth below. They roamed the streets, they leaped from
house to house. The high and thick fences they penetrated
like a flood, the door could not stay them, nor the bolt make
them turn back. They glided through the door like a
serpent, they pierced through the planks like the wind.
There was no place, however small, which they could not
invade, none so large that they could not fill. And their
wickedness was equal to their power. <q>They are wicked,
they are wicked,</q> says an incantation. No prayers could
move them, no supplications could make them relent; for
they knew no pity, they hearkened not to reason, they knew
no troth. To them all manner of evil was ascribed. Their
presence was felt not only in the terrible winds that swept
the land, in the fevers bred of the marshes, and in the
diseases engendered by the damp heat of summer. All
the petty annoyances of life&mdash;a sudden fall, an unlucky
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
word, a headache, a paltry quarrel&mdash;were set down to the
agency of fiends; and all the fierce emotions that rend the
mind&mdash;love, hate, jealousy, and madness&mdash;were equally
the work of these invisible tormentors. Men and women
stood in constant danger of them. They tore the wife from
the bosom of her husband, the son from the knees of his
father. They ate the flesh and drank the blood of men,
they prevented them from sleeping or taking food, and to
adopt a metaphor from one of the texts, <q>they ground the
country like flour.</q> Almost every part of the human frame
was menaced by a special fiend. One demon assailed the
head, another the neck, another the hips, and so on. They
bound a man's hands, they fettered his feet, they spat poison
and gall on him. Day and night must he wander without
rest; sighs and lamentations were his food. They attacked
even the animals. They drove doves from their dovecotes,
and swallows from their nests; they smote the bull and the
ass. They pursued the cattle to their stalls: they lodged
with the horses in the stable: they caused the she-ass to
miscarry, and the young ass at its mother's dugs to pine
away. Even lifeless things could be possessed by them; for
there were demons that rushed against houses and took
walls by storm, that shut themselves up in doors, and hid
themselves under bolts. Indeed they threatened the whole
world with destruction, and there was none that could deliver
from them save only the mighty god Marduk.<note place='foot'>M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of
Babylonia and Assyria</hi> (Boston, 1898),
pp. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion Babyloniens
und Assyriens</hi>, i. (Giessen,
1905) pp. 278 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; C. Fossey, <hi rend='italic'>La
Magie Assyrienne</hi> (Paris, 1902), pp.
27-30, 34; E. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften
und das Alte Testament</hi>,
Dritte Auflage, neu bearbeitet von
H. Zimmern und H. Winckler (Berlin,
1902), pp. 458 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in ancient and modern
Egypt.</note>
In the opinion of the ancient Egyptians <q>there were
good spirits as well as bad, but the <hi rend='italic'>Book of the Dead</hi>
practically ignores the former, and its magical formulae were
directed entirely against the operations of evil spirits. Though
naturally of a gay and light-hearted disposition, the Egyptian
must have lived in a perpetual state of fear of spirits of all
kinds, spirits of calamity, disease, and sickness, spirits of
angry gods and ancestors, and above all the spirit of Death.
His imagination filled the world with spirits, whose acts
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
seemed to him to be generally malevolent, and his magical
and religious literature and his amulets testify to the very
real terror with which he regarded his future existence in the
world of spirits. Escape from such spirits was impossible,
for they could not die.</q><note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi> (London,
1911), ii. 150.</note> In modern Egypt the jinn, a
class of spiritual beings intermediate between angels and
men, are believed to pervade the solid matter of the earth as
well as the firmament, and they inhabit rivers, ruined houses,
wells, baths, ovens, and so forth. So thickly do they swarm
that in pouring water or other liquids on the ground an
Egyptian will commonly exclaim or mutter <q><foreign rend='italic'>Destoor!</foreign></q>
thereby asking the permission or craving the pardon of any
jinn who might chance to be there, and who might otherwise
resent being suddenly soused with water or unsavoury
fluids. So too when people light a fire, let down a bucket
into a well, or perform other necessary functions, they will
say <q>Permission!</q> or <q>Permission, ye blessed!</q><note place='foot'>E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Modern Egyptians</hi>
(Paisley and London, 1895), chap. x.
pp. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again,
in Egypt it is not considered proper to sweep out a house
at night, lest in doing so you should knock against a jinnee,
who might avenge the insult.<note place='foot'>C. B. Klunzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Bilder aus
Oberägypten, der Wüste und dem
Rothen Meere</hi> (Stuttgart, 1877), p.
382; compare <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> pp. 374 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in ancient
Greece and
mediaeval
Europe.</note>
The earliest of the Greek philosophers, Thales, held that
the world is full of gods or spirits;<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>De anima</hi>, i. 5. 17;
Diogenes Laertius, i. 1. 27.</note> and the same primitive
creed was expounded by one of the latest pagan thinkers of
antiquity. Porphyry declared that demons appeared in the
likeness of animals, that every house and every body was
full of them, and that forms of ceremonial purification, such
as beating the air and so forth, had no other object but that
of driving away the importunate swarms of these invisible
but dangerous beings. He explained that evil spirits delighted
in food, especially in blood and impurities, that they
settled like flies on us at meals, and that they could only be
kept at a distance by ceremonial observances, which were
directed, not to pleasing the gods, but simply and solely to
beating off devils.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, quoted by Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio Evangelii</hi>, iv. 23.</note> His theory of religious purification seems
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
faithfully to reflect the creed of the savage on this subject,<note place='foot'>Elsewhere I have attempted to
shew that a particular class of purifications&mdash;those
observed by mourners&mdash;is
intended to protect the living from
the disembodied spirits of the dead
(<q>On certain Burial Customs as illustrative
of the Primitive Theory of the
Soul,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xv. (1886) pp. 64 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
but a philosopher is perhaps the last person whom we should
expect to find acting as a mirror of savagery. It is less
surprising to meet with the same venerable doctrine, the
same world-wide superstition in the mouth of a mediaeval
abbot; for we know that a belief in devils has the authority
of the founder of Christianity and is sanctioned by the
teaching of the church. No Esquimau on the frozen shores
of Labrador, no Indian in the sweltering forests of Guiana,
no cowering Hindoo in the jungles of Bengal, could well
have a more constant and abiding sense of the presence
of malignant demons everywhere about him than had Abbot
Richalm, who ruled over the Cistercian monastery of
Schönthal in the first half of the thirteenth century. In
the curious work to which he gave the name of <hi rend='italic'>Revelations</hi>,
he set forth how he was daily and hourly infested by devils,
whom, though he could not see, he heard, and to whom he
imputed all the ailments of his flesh and all the frailties
of his spirit. If he felt squeamish, he was sure that the
feeling was wrought in him by demoniacal agency. If
puckers appeared on his nose, if his lower lip drooped,
the devils had again to answer for it; a cough, a cold
in the head, a hawking and spitting, could have none
but a supernatural and devilish origin. If, pacing in his
orchard on a sunny autumn morning, the portly abbot
stooped to pick up the mellow fruit that had fallen in
the night, the blood that mounted to his purple face was
sent coursing thither by his invisible foes. If the abbot
tossed on his sleepless couch, while the moonlight, streaming
in at the window, cast the shadows of the stanchions like
black bars on the floor of his cell, it was not the fleas and so
forth that kept him awake&mdash;oh no! <q>Vermin,</q> said he sagely,
<q>do not really bite</q>; they seem to bite indeed, but it is
all the work of devils. If a monk snored in the dormitory,
the unseemly noise proceeded not from him, but from a
demon lurking in his person. Especially dangerous were
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
the demons of intoxication. These subtle fiends commonly
lodged at the taverns in the neighbouring town, but on feast
days they were apt to slip through the monastery gates and
glide unseen among the monks seated at the refectory table,
or gathered round the roaring fire on the hearth, while the
bleak wind whistled in the abbey towers, and a more generous
vintage than usual glowed and sparkled in the flagons.
If at such times a jolly, rosy-faced brother appeared to the
carnal eye and ear to grow obstreperous or maudlin, to
speak thick or to reel and stagger in his gait, be sure it
was not the fiery spirit of the grape that moved the holy
man; it was a spirit of quite a different order. Holding
such views on the source of all bodily and mental indisposition,
it was natural enough that the abbot should prescribe
remedies which are not to be found in the pharmacopœia,
and which would be asked for in vain at an apothecary's.
They consisted chiefly of holy water and the sign of the
cross; this last he recommended particularly as a specific
for flea-bites.<note place='foot'>C. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Der Aberglaube des Mittelalters</hi> (Bâle, 1884), pp. 109-111,
191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in modern
Europe.</note>
It is easy to suggest that the abbot's wits were unsettled,
that he suffered from hallucinations, and so forth.
This may have been so; yet a mode of thought like his
seems to be too common over a great part of the world
to allow us to attribute it purely to mental derangement.
In the Middle Ages, when the general level of knowledge
was low, a state of mind like Richalm's may have been
shared by multitudes even of educated people, who have
not, however, like him, left a monument of their folly to
posterity. At the present day, through the advance and
spread of knowledge, it might be difficult to find any person
of acknowledged sanity holding the abbot's opinions on the
subject of demons; but in remote parts of Europe a little
research might shew that the creed of Porphyry and Richalm
is still held, with but little variation, by the mass of the
people. Thus we are told that the Roumanians of Transylvania
<q>believe themselves to be surrounded on all sides
by whole legions of evil spirits. These devils are furthermore
assisted by <foreign lang='ro' rend='italic'>ismejus</foreign> (another sort of dragon), witches,
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
and goblins, and to each of these dangerous beings are
ascribed particular powers on particular days and at certain
places. Many and curious are therefore the means by
which the Roumanians endeavour to counteract these baleful
influences; and a whole complicated study, about as
laborious as the mastering of an unknown language, is
required in order to teach an unfortunate peasant to steer
clear of the dangers by which he supposes himself to be
beset on all sides.</q><note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi> (Edinburgh and London, 1888),
i. 328. The superstitions of the
Roumanians of Transylvania have
been collected by W. Schmidt in his
tract <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr und seine Tage in
Meinung und Brauch der Romänen
Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt, 1866).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
in modern
Armenia.</note>
Similar beliefs are held to this day by the Armenians,
who, though they are not a European people, have basked in
the light of Christianity from a time when Central and
Northern Europe was still plunged in heathen darkness.
All the activities, we are told, of these professing Christians
<q>are paralyzed after sunset, because at every step they
quake with fear, believing that the evil demons are everywhere
present in the air, in the water, on the earth. By
day the evil ones are under the earth, therefore boiling hot
water may not be poured on the ground, because it sinks
into the earth and burns the feet of the children of the evil
spirits. But in the evening the superstitious Armenian will
pour no water at all on the earth, because the evil ones are
everywhere present on the earth. Some of them are walking
about, others are sitting at table and feasting, so that they
might be disturbed by the pouring out of water, and they
would take vengeance for it. Also by night you should not
smite the ground with a stick, nor sweep out the house, nor
remove the dung from the stable, because without knowing
it you might hit the evil spirits. But if you are compelled
to sweep by night, you singe the tip of the broom so as to
frighten the evil ones away in time. You must not go out at
night bareheaded, for the evil ones would smite you on the
head. It is also dangerous to drink water out of a vessel in
the dark, especially when the water is drawn from a brook
or river; for the evil ones in the water hit out, or they pass
with the water into a man. Therefore in drinking you
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
should hold a knife with three blades or a piece of iron in
the water. The baleful influence of the nocturnal demons
extends also to useful objects; hence after sunset people do
not lend salt or fire and do not shake out the tablecloth,
because thereby the salt would lose its savour and the
welfare of the house would depart.</q><note place='foot'>Manuk Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>Der armenische Volksglaube</hi> (Leipsic, 1899), pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Public Expulsion of Evils.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General
clearances
of evils
take the
form of
expulsions
of demons.</note>
We can now understand why those general clearances of
evil, to which from time to time the savage resorts, should
commonly take the form of a forcible expulsion of devils.
In these evil spirits primitive man sees the cause of many if
not of most of his troubles, and he fancies that if he can only
deliver himself from them, things will go better with him.
The public attempts to expel the accumulated ills of a
whole community may be divided into two classes, according
as the expelled evils are immaterial and invisible or are
embodied in a material vehicle or scapegoat. The former
may be called the direct or immediate expulsion of evils;
the latter the indirect or mediate expulsion, or the expulsion
by scapegoat. We begin with examples of the former.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General expulsions
of
demons in
Melanesia,
Australia
and South
Africa.</note>
In the island of Rook, between New Guinea and New
Britain, when any misfortune has happened, all the people
run together, scream, curse, howl, and beat the air with
sticks to drive away the devil (<foreign rend='italic'>Marsába</foreign>), who is supposed to
be the author of the mishap. From the spot where the
mishap took place they drive him step by step to the sea,
and on reaching the shore they redouble their shouts and
blows in order to expel him from the island. He generally
retires to the sea or to the island of Lottin.<note place='foot'>Paul Reina, <q>Über die Bewohner
der Insel Rook,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Erdkunde</hi>, N.F., iv. (1858)
p. 356.</note> The natives
of New Britain ascribe sickness, drought, the failure of
crops, and in short all misfortunes, to the influence of
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
wicked spirits. So at times when many people sicken and
die, as at the beginning of the rainy season, all the inhabitants
of a district, armed with branches and clubs, go out by
moonlight to the fields, where they beat and stamp on the
ground with wild howls till morning, believing that this
drives away the devils; and for the same purpose they rush
through the village with burning torches.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Im Bismarck-Archipel</hi>
(Leipsic, 1887), p. 142; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</hi> (Stuttgart,
1907), p. 119.</note> The natives of New
Caledonia are said to believe that all evils are caused by a
powerful and malignant spirit; hence in order to rid themselves
of him they will from time to time dig a great pit, round
which the whole tribe gathers. After cursing the demon,
they fill up the pit with earth, and trample on the top with
loud shouts. This they call burying the evil spirit.<note place='foot'>O. Opigez, <q>Aperçu général sur
la Nouvelle-Calédonie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), VII.
Série, vii. (1886) p. 443.</note>
Among the Dieri tribe of Central Australia, when a serious
illness occurs, the medicine-men expel Cootchie or the devil
by beating the ground in and outside of the camp with the
stuffed tail of a kangaroo, until they have chased the demon
away to some distance from the camp.<note place='foot'>S. Gason, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxiv. (1895) p. 170.</note> In some South
African tribes it is a general rule that no common man may
meddle with spirits, whether good or bad, except to offer
the customary sacrifices. Demons may haunt him and
make his life a burden to him, but he must submit to their
machinations until the matter is taken up by the proper
authorities. A baboon may be sent by evil spirits and
perch on a tree within gunshot, or regale itself in his maize-field;
but to fire at the beast would be worse than suicide.
So long as a man remains a solitary sufferer, he has little
chance of redress. It is supposed that he has committed
some crime, and that the ancestors in their wrath have sent
a demon to torment him. But should his neighbours also
suffer; should the baboon from choice or necessity (for men
do sometimes pluck up courage to scare the brutes) select a
fresh field for its depredations, or the roof of another man's
barn for its perch, the case begins to wear a different complexion.
The magicians now deal with the matter seriously.
One man may be haunted for his sins by a demon, but a
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
whole community infested by devils is another matter. To
shoot the baboon, however, would be useless; it would
merely enrage the demon and increase the danger. The
first thing to do is to ascertain the permanent abode of the
devil. It is generally a deep pool with overhanging banks
and dark recesses. There the villagers assemble with the
priests and magicians at their head, and set about pelting
the demon with stones, men, women, and children all joining
in the assault, while they load the object of their fear and
hate with the foulest abuse. Drums too are beaten, and
horns blown at intervals, and when everybody has been
worked up to such a frenzy of excitement that some even
fancy they see the imp dodging the missiles, he suddenly
takes to flight, and the village is rid of him for a time.
After that, the crops may be protected and baboons killed
with impunity.<note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 100-102.
The writer, who describes the ceremony
at first hand, remarks that <q>there is
no periodic purging of devils, nor are
more spirits than one expelled at a
time.</q> He adds: <q>I have noticed
frequently a connection between the
quantity of grain that could be spared
for making beer, and the frequency of
gatherings for the purging of evils.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General expulsion
of
demons in
Minahassa,
Halmahera,
and
the Kei
Islands.</note>
When a village has been visited by a series of disasters
or a severe epidemic, the inhabitants of Minahassa in
Celebes lay the blame upon the devils who are infesting
the village and who must be expelled from it. Accordingly,
early one morning all the people, men, women, and
children, quit their homes, carrying their household goods
with them, and take up their quarters in temporary huts
which have been erected outside the village. Here they
spend several days, offering sacrifices and preparing for the
final ceremony. At last the men, some wearing masks,
others with their faces blackened, and so on, but all armed
with swords, guns, pikes, or brooms, steal cautiously and
silently back to the deserted village. Then, at a signal
from the priest, they rush furiously up and down the streets
and into and under the houses (which are raised on piles
above the ground), yelling and striking on walls, doors, and
windows, to drive away the devils. Next, the priests and
the rest of the people come with the holy fire and march
nine times round each house and thrice round the ladder
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
that leads up to it, carrying the fire with them. Then they
take the fire into the kitchen, where it must burn for three
days continuously. The devils are now driven away, and
great and general is the joy.<note place='foot'>[P. N. Wilken], <q>De godsdienst
en godsdienstplegtigheden der Alfoeren
in de Menahassa op het eiland Celebes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</hi>,
December 1849, pp. 392-394; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Bijdragen tot de kennis van de
zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in
de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
vii. (1863) pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. G. F.
Riedel, <q>De Minahasa in 1825,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xviii. (1872) pp. 521
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Wilken's first and fuller account
is reprinted in N. Graafland's <hi rend='italic'>De
Minahassa</hi> (Rotterdam, 1869), i. 117-120.
A German translation of Wilken's
earlier article is printed in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für allgemeine Erdkunde</hi>, N.F.,
x. (1861) pp. 43-61.</note> The Alfoors of Halmahera
attribute epidemics to the devil who comes from other
villages to carry them off. So, in order to rid the village of
the disease, the sorcerer drives away the devil. From all
the villagers he receives a costly garment and places it on
four vessels, which he takes to the forest and leaves at
the spot where the devil is supposed to be. Then
with mocking words he bids the demon abandon the
place.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Galela und
Tobeloresen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xvii. (1885) p. 82; G. A.
Wilken, <q>Het Shamanisme bij de
Volken van de Indischen Archipel,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch Indie</hi>, xxxvi.
(1887) p. 484; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Verspreide Geschriften</hi>
(The Hague, 1912), iii. 383.
When smallpox is raging, the Toradjas
of Central Celebes abandon the
village and live in the bush for seven
days in order to make the spirit of
smallpox believe that they are all
dead. But it does not appear that they
forcibly expel him from the village.
See N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt, <hi rend='italic'>De
Bare'e-sprekende Toradja's van Midden-Celebes</hi>,
i. (Batavia, 1912) p. 417.</note> In the Kei Islands to the south-west of New
Guinea, the evil spirits, who are quite distinct from the
souls of the dead, form a mighty host. Almost every tree
and every cave is the lodging-place of one of these fiends,
who are moreover extremely irascible and apt to fly out on
the smallest provocation. To speak loudly in passing their
abode, to ease nature near a haunted tree or cave, is enough
to bring down their wrath on the offender, and he must
either appease them by an offering or burn the scrapings of
a buffalo's horn or the hair of a Papuan slave, in order that
the smell may drive the foul fiends away. The spirits
manifest their displeasure by sending sickness and other
calamities. Hence in times of public misfortune, as when
an epidemic is raging, and all other remedies have failed,
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
the whole population go forth with the priest at their head
to a place at some distance from the village. Here at sunset
they erect a couple of poles with a cross-bar between
them, to which they attach bags of rice, wooden models
of pivot-guns, gongs, bracelets, and so on. Then, when
everybody has taken his place at the poles and a
death-like silence reigns, the priest lifts up his voice and
addresses the spirits in their own language as follows:
<q>Ho! ho! ho! ye evil spirits who dwell in the trees, ye
evil spirits who live in the grottoes, ye evil spirits who
lodge in the earth, we give you these pivot-guns, these
gongs, etc. Let the sickness cease and not so many people
die of it.</q> Then everybody runs home as fast as their legs
can carry them.<note place='foot'>C. M. Pleyte, <q>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Kei-eilanden,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig
Genootschap</hi>, Tweede Serie,
x. (1893) pp. 834 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A briefer
account of the custom had previously
been given by J. G. F. Riedel (<hi rend='italic'>De
sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua</hi>, The Hague, 1886,
p. 239).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled in
Nias.</note>
In the island of Nias, when a man is seriously ill and
other remedies have been tried in vain, the sorcerer proceeds
to exorcise the devil who is causing the illness. A pole is
set up in front of the house, and from the top of the pole a
rope of palm-leaves is stretched to the roof of the house.
Then the sorcerer mounts the roof with a pig, which he kills
and allows to roll from the roof to the ground. The devil,
anxious to get the pig, lets himself down hastily from the
roof by the rope of palm-leaves, and a good spirit, invoked
by the sorcerer, prevents him from climbing up again. If
this remedy fails, it is believed that other devils must still be
lurking in the house. So a general hunt is made after them.
All the doors and windows in the house are closed, except a
single dormer-window in the roof. The men, shut up in the
house, hew and slash with their swords right and left to the
clash of gongs and the rub-a-dub of drums. Terrified at
this onslaught, the devils escape by the dormer-window, and
sliding down the rope of palm-leaves take themselves off.
As all the doors and windows, except the one in the roof,
are shut, the devils cannot get into the house again. In the
case of an epidemic, the proceedings are similar. All the
gates of the village, except one, are closed; every voice is
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
raised, every gong and drum beaten, every sword brandished.
Thus the devils are driven out and the last gate is shut
behind them. For eight days thereafter the village is in a
state of siege, no one being allowed to enter it.<note place='foot'>J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B.
von Rosenberg, <q>Verslag omtrent het
eiland Nias,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschapen</hi>, xxx. (Batavia, 1863)
pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. von Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der
Malayische Archipel</hi> (Leipsic, 1878),
pp. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare L. N. H. A.
Chatelin, <q>Godsdienst en Bijgeloof
der Niassers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi.
(1880) p. 139; E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un
Viaggio a Nías</hi> (Milan, 1890), pp. 195,
382. The Dyaks also drive the devil
at the point of the sword from a house
where there is sickness. See C. Hupe,
<q>Korte verhandeling over de godsdienst,
zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neérlands Indië</hi>, 1846,
dl. iii. p. 149.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Spiritual
quarantine
against
demons of
sickness in
Nias.</note>
The means adopted in Nias to exclude an epidemic from
a village which has not yet been infected by it are somewhat
similar; but as they exhibit an interesting combination of
religious ritual with the purely magical ceremony of exorcism,
it may be worth while to describe them. When it is known
that a village is suffering from the ravages of a dangerous
malady, the other villages in the neighbourhood take what
they regard as effective measures for securing immunity
from the disease. Some of these measures commend themselves
to us as rational and others do not. In the first
place, quarantine is established in each village, not only
against the inhabitants of the infected village, but against
all strangers; no person from outside is allowed to enter.
In the second place, a feast is made by the people for one
of their idols who goes by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>Fangeroe wõchõ</foreign>, or
Protector from sickness. All the people of the village must
participate in the sacrifice and bear a share of the cost. The
principal idol, crowned with palm-leaves, is set up in front
of the chief's house, and all the inhabitants who can do so
gather about it. The names of those who cannot attend
are mentioned, apparently as a substitute for their attendance
in person. While the priest is reciting the spells for the
banishment of the evil spirits, all persons present come
forward and touch the image. A pig is then killed and
its flesh furnishes a common meal. The mouth of the idol
is smeared with the bloody heart of the pig, and a dishful
of the cooked pork is set before him. Of the flesh thus
consecrated to the idol none but priests and chiefs may
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
partake. Idols called <foreign rend='italic'>daha</foreign>, or branches of the principal idol,
are also set up in front of all the other houses in the village.
Moreover, bogies made of black wood with white eyes, to
which the broken crockery of the inhabitants has freely contributed,
are placed at the entrances of the village to scare
the demon and prevent him from entering. All sorts of
objects whitened with chalk are also hung up in front of the
houses to keep the devil out. When eight days have elapsed,
it is thought that the sacrifice has taken effect, and the
priest puts an end to the quarantine. All boys and men
now assemble for the purpose of expelling the evil spirit.
Led by the priest, they march four times, with a prodigious
noise and uproar, from one end of the village to the other,
slashing the air with their knives and stabbing it with their
spears to frighten the devil away. If all these efforts prove
vain, and the dreaded sickness breaks out, the people think
it must be because they have departed from the ways of
their fathers by raising the price of victuals and pigs too
high or by enriching themselves with unjust gain. Accordingly
a new idol is made and set up in front of the chief's
house; and while the priest engages in prayer, the chief and
the magnates of the village touch the image, vowing as they
do so to return to the old ways and cursing all such as may
refuse their consent or violate the new law thus solemnly
enacted. Then all present betake themselves to the river
and erect another idol on the bank. In presence of this
latter idol the weights and measures are compared, and any
that exceed the lawful standard are at once reduced to it.
When this has been done, they rock the image to and fro to
signify, or perhaps rather to ensure, thereby that he who
does not keep the new law shall suffer misfortune, or fall
sick, or be thwarted in some way or other. Then a pig is
killed and eaten on the bank of the river. The feast being
over, each family contributes a certain sum in token that
they make restitution of their unlawful gains. The money
thus collected is tied in a bundle, and the priest holds the
bundle up towards the sky and down towards the earth to
satisfy the god of the upper and the god of the nether world
that justice has now been done. After that he either flings
the bag of money into the river or buries it in the ground
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
beside the idol. In the latter case the money naturally
disappears, and the people explain its disappearance by
saying that the evil spirit has come and fetched it.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kramer, <q>Der Götzendienst
der Niasser,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiii.
(1890) pp. 486-488.</note> A
method like that which at the present day the people of
Nias adopt for the sake of conjuring the demon of disease
was employed in antiquity by the Caunians of Asia Minor
to banish certain foreign gods whom they had imprudently
established in their country. All the men of military age
assembled under arms, and with spear-thrusts in the air
drove the strange gods step by step from the land and
across the boundaries.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 172.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled
in the
Solomon
Islands, Burma, India, China.</note>
The Solomon Islanders of Bougainville Straits believe
that epidemics are always, or nearly always, caused by evil
spirits; and accordingly when the people of a village have
been suffering generally from colds, they have been known
to blow conch-shells, beat tins, shout, and knock on the
houses for the purpose of expelling the demons and so curing
their colds.<note place='foot'>G. C. Wheeler, <q>Sketch of the
Totemism and Religion of the People
of the Islands in the Bougainville
Straits (Western Solomon Islands),</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>, xv.
(1912) pp. 49, 51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When cholera has broken out in a Burmese
village the able-bodied men scramble on the roofs and lay
about them with bamboos and billets of wood, while all the
rest of the population, old and young, stand below and thump
drums, blow trumpets, yell, scream, beat floors, walls, tin
pans, everything to make a din. This uproar, repeated on
three successive nights, is thought to be very effective in
driving away the cholera demons.<note place='foot'>C. J. F. S. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi>
(London, 1878), p. 233; Shway Yoe,
<hi rend='italic'>The Burman, his Life and Notions</hi>
(London, 1882), i. 282, ii. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. 98; Max and Bertha Ferrars,
<hi rend='italic'>Burma</hi> (London, 1900), p. 128.</note> The Shans of Kengtung,
a province of Upper Burma, imagine that epidemics are
brought about by the prowling ghosts of wicked men, such
as thieves and murderers, who cannot rest but go about
doing all the harm they can to the living. Hence when
sickness is rife, the people take steps to expel these dangerous
spirits. The Buddhist priests exert themselves actively
in the beneficent enterprise. They assemble in a body at
the Town Court and read the scriptures. Guns are fired
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
and processions march to the city gates, by which the fiends
are supposed to take their departure. There small trays of
food are left for them, but the larger offerings are deposited
in the middle of the town.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. George Scott and J. P.
Hardiman, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma
and the Shan States</hi>, Part ii. vol. i.
(Rangoon, 1901) p. 440.</note> When smallpox first appeared
amongst the Kumis of South-Eastern India, they thought it
was a devil come from Aracan. The villages were placed
in a state of siege, no one being allowed to leave or enter
them. A monkey was killed by being dashed on the
ground, and its body was hung at the village gate. Its
blood, mixed with small river pebbles, was sprinkled on the
houses, the threshold of every house was swept with the
monkey's tail, and the fiend was adjured to depart.<note place='foot'>T. H. Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Tribes of
South-Eastern India</hi> (London, 1870),
p. 226.</note> During
the hot summer cholera is endemic in Southern China, and
from time to time, when the mortality is great, vigorous
attempts are made to expel the demons who do all the
mischief. For this salutary purpose processions parade the
streets by night; images of the gods are borne in them,
torches waved, gongs beaten, guns fired, crackers popped,
swords brandished, demon-dispelling trumpets blown, and
priests in full canonicals trot up and down jingling hand-bells,
winding blasts on buffalo horns, and reciting exorcisms.
Sometimes the deities are represented in these processions
by living men, who are believed to be possessed by the divine
spirit. Such a man-god may be seen naked to the waist with
his dishevelled hair streaming down his back; long daggers
are stuck in his cheeks and arms, so that the blood drips
from them. In his hand he carries a two-edged sword, with
which he deals doughty blows at the invisible foes in the
air; but sometimes he inflicts bloody wounds on his own
back with the weapon or with a ball which is studded with
long sharp nails. Other inspired men are carried in armchairs,
of which the seat, back, arms, and foot-rest are set
with nails or composed of rows of parallel sword-blades, that
cut into the flesh of the wretches seated on them: others
are stretched at full length on beds of nails. For hours
these bleeding votaries are carried about the city. Again,
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
it is not uncommon to see in the procession a medium or
man-god with a thick needle thrust through his tongue.
His bloody spittle drips on sheets of paper, which the crowd
eagerly scrambles for, knowing that with the blood they
have absorbed the devil-dispelling power inherent in the
man-god. The bloody papers, pasted on the lintel, walls,
or beds of a house or on the bodies of the family, are
supposed to afford complete protection against cholera.
Such are the methods by which in Southern China the
demons of disease are banished the city.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, vi. (Leyden, 1910)
pp. 981 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of the
Chinese</hi> (New York, 1910), pp. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled in
Japan,
Corea and
Tonquin.</note>
In Japan the old-fashioned method of staying an
epidemic is to expel the demon of the plague from every
house into which he has entered. The treatment begins
with the house in which the malady has appeared in the
mildest form. First of all a Shinto priest makes a preliminary
visit to the sick-room and extracts from the demon
a promise that he will depart with him at his next visit.
The day after he comes again, and, seating himself near the
patient, beseeches the evil spirit to come away with him.
Meanwhile red rice, which is used only on special occasions,
has been placed at the sufferer's head, a closed litter made
of pine boughs has been brought in, and four men equipped
with flags or weapons have taken post in the four corners of
the room to prevent the demon from seeking refuge there.
All are silent but the priest. The prayer being over, the
sick man's pillow is hastily thrown into the litter, and the
priest cries, <q>All right now!</q> At that the bearers double
with it into the street, the people within and without beat
the air with swords, sticks, or anything that comes to hand,
while others assist in the cure by banging away at drums
and gongs. A procession is now formed in which only men
take part, some of them carrying banners, others provided
with a drum, a bell, a flute, a horn, and all of them wearing
fillets and horns of twisted straw to keep the demon away
from themselves. As the procession starts an old man
chants, <q>What god are you bearing away?</q> To which the
others respond in chorus, <q>The god of the pest we are bearing
away!</q> Then to the music of the drum, the bell, the
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
flute, and the horn the litter is borne through the streets.
During its passage all the people in the town who are not
taking part in the ceremony remain indoors, every house
along the route of the procession is carefully closed, and at
the cross-roads swordsmen are stationed, who guard the
street by hewing the air to right and left with their blades,
lest the demon should escape by that way. The litter is
thus carried to a retired spot between two towns and left
there, while all who escorted it thither run away. Only the
priest remains behind for half an hour to complete the exorcism
and the cure. The bearers of the litter spend the
night praying in a temple. Next day they return home,
but not until they have plunged into a cold bath in the
open air to prevent the demon from following them. The
same litter serves to convey the evil spirit from every house
in the town.<note place='foot'>This description is taken from a
newspaper-cutting, which was sent to
me from the west of Scotland in October
1890, but without the name or
date of the paper. The account, which
is headed <q>Exorcism of the Pest Demon
in Japan,</q> purports to be derived from
a series of notes on medical customs of
the Japanese, which were contributed
by Dr. C. H. H. Hall, of the U.S.
Navy, to the <hi rend='italic'>Sei-I Kwai Medical
Journal</hi>. Compare Lafcadio Hearn,
<hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan</hi> (London,
1894), i. 147.</note> In Corea, when a patient is recovering from
the smallpox, a farewell dinner is given in honour of the
departing spirit of the disease. Friends and relations are
invited, and the spirit's share of the good things is packed
on the back of a hobby-horse and despatched to the boundary
of the town or village, while respectful farewells are
spoken and hearty good wishes uttered for his prosperous
journey to his own place.<note place='foot'>Masanao Koike, <q>Zwei Jahren in
Korea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, iv. (1891) p. 10; Mrs.
Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea and her Neighbours</hi>
(London, 1898), ii. 240.</note> In Tonquin also a banquet is
sometimes given to the demon of sickness to induce him to
go quietly away from the house. The most honourable
place at the festive board is reserved for the fiend; prayers,
caresses, and presents are lavished on him; but if he proves
obdurate, they assail him with coarse abuse and drive him
from the house with musket-shots.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, Nouvelle
Édition (Paris, 1780-1783), xvi.
206. It will be noticed that in this
and the preceding case the principle
of expulsion is applied for the benefit
of an individual, not of a whole community.
Yet the method of procedure
in both is so similar to that adopted in
the cases under consideration that I have
allowed myself to cite them.</note>
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled in
Africa, America.</note>
When an epidemic is raging on the Gold Coast of West
Africa, the people will sometimes turn out, armed with clubs
and torches, to drive the evil spirits away. At a given
signal the whole population begin with frightful yells to beat
in every corner of the houses, then rush like mad into the
streets waving torches and striking frantically in the empty
air. The uproar goes on till somebody reports that the
cowed and daunted demons have made good their escape
by a gate of the town or village; the people stream out
after them, pursue them for some distance into the forest,
and warn them never to return. The expulsion of the
devils is followed by a general massacre of all the cocks in
the village or town, lest by their unseasonable crowing they
should betray to the banished demons the direction they
must take to return to their old homes. For in that country
the forest grows so thick or the grass so high that you can
seldom see a village till you are close upon it; and the first
warning of your approach to human habitations is the crowing
of the cocks.<note place='foot'>G. Zündel, <q>Land und Volk der
Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in Westafrika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für
Erdkunde zu Berlin</hi>, xii. (1877) pp.
414 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Great Bassam, in Guinea, the French
traveller Hecquard witnessed the exorcism of the evil spirit
who was believed to make women barren. The women who
wished to become mothers offered to the fetish wine-vessels
or statuettes representing women suckling children. Then
being assembled in the fetish hut, they were sprinkled with
rum by the priest, while young men fired guns and brandished
swords to drive away the demon.<note place='foot'>H. Hecquard, <hi rend='italic'>Reise an die Küste
und in das Innere von West-Afrika</hi>
(Leipsic, 1854), p. 43.</note> When smallpox
breaks out in a village of the Cameroons, in West Africa, the
spirit of the disease is driven out of the village by a <q>bushman</q>
or member of the oppressed Bassa tribe, the members
of which are reputed to possess high magical powers. The
mode of expulsion consists in drumming and dancing for
several days. Then the village is enclosed by ropes made
of creepers in order that the disease may not return. Over
the principal paths arches of bent poles are made, and fowls
are buried as sacrifices. Plants of various sorts and the
mushroom-shaped nests of termite ants are hung from the
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
arches, and a dog, freshly killed, is suspended over the
middle of the entrance.<note place='foot'>Dr. A. Plehn, <q>Beobachtungen
in Kamerun, über die Anschauungen
und Gebräuche einiger Negerstämme,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xxxvi.
(1904) pp. 717 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Gallas try to drive away
fever by firing guns, shouting, and lighting great fires.<note place='foot'>Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie
Nordost-Afrikas: die materielle Cultur
der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi> (Berlin,
1893), p. 177.</note>
When sickness was prevalent in a Huron village, and all
other remedies had been tried in vain, the Indians had
recourse to the ceremony called <foreign rend='italic'>Lonouyroya</foreign>, <q>which is the
principal invention and most proper means, so they say, to
expel from the town or village the devils and evil spirits
which cause, induce, and import all the maladies and infirmities
which they suffer in body and mind.</q> Accordingly,
one evening the men would begin to rush like madmen
about the village, breaking and upsetting whatever they came
across in the wigwams. They threw fire and burning brands
about the streets, and all night long they ran howling and
singing without cessation. Then they all dreamed of something,
a knife, dog, skin, or whatever it might be, and when
morning came they went from wigwam to wigwam asking
for presents. These they received silently, till the particular
thing was given them which they had dreamed about. On
receiving it they uttered a cry of joy and rushed from the
hut, amid the congratulations of all present. The health of
those who received what they had dreamed of was believed
to be assured; whereas those who did not get what they had
set their hearts upon regarded their fate as sealed.<note place='foot'>F. Gabriel Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand
Voyage du Pays des Hurons</hi>, pp. 279
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> of the reprint, Paris,
Libraire Tross, 1865). Compare
<hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1639, pp. 88-92
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858),
from which it appears that each man
demanded the subject of his dream in
the form of a riddle, which the hearers
tried to solve. The custom of asking
riddles at certain seasons or on certain
special occasions is curious and has not
yet, so far as I know, been explained.
Perhaps enigmas were originally circumlocutions
adopted at times when
for certain reasons the speaker was
forbidden the use of direct terms.
They appear to be especially employed
in the neighbourhood of a dead body.
Thus in Bolang Mongondo (Celebes)
riddles may never be asked except
when there is a corpse in the village.
See N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaäng Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 357. In
the Aru archipelago, while a corpse is
uncoffined, the watchers propound
riddles to each other, or rather they
think of things which the others have
to guess. See J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De
sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua</hi>, pp. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In
Brittany after a burial, when the rest
have gone to partake of the funeral
banquet, old men remain behind in the
graveyard, and having seated themselves
on mallows, ask each other
riddles. See A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes,
Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de
France</hi> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p.
199. Among the Akamba of British
East Africa boys and girls at circumcision
have to interpret certain pictographs
cut on sticks: these pictographs
are called <q>riddles.</q> See C. W.
Hobley, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of A-Kamba and
other East African Tribes</hi> (Cambridge,
1910), pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In Vedic times the
priests proposed enigmas to each other
at the great sacrifice of a horse. See
<hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, translated
by J. Eggeling, Part v. (Oxford,
1900), pp. 314-316 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of
the East</hi>, vol. xliv.); H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Religion des Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p.
475. Compare O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon
der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</hi>
(Strasburg, 1901), pp. 647
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among Turkish tribes of Central
Asia girls publicly propound riddles to
their wooers, who are punished if they
cannot read them. See H. Vambery,
<hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi> (Leipsic, 1885), pp.
232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among the Alfoors of Central
Celebes riddles may only be asked
during the season when the fields are
being tilled and the crops are growing.
People meeting together at this time
occupy themselves with asking riddles
and telling stories. As soon as some
one has found the answer to a
riddle, they all cry out, <q>Make our
rice to grow, make fat ears to grow
both in the valleys and on the heights.</q>
But during the months which elapse
between harvest and the preparation
of new land for tillage the propounding
of enigmas is strictly forbidden. The
writer who reports the custom conjectures
that the cry <q>Make our rice
to grow</q> is addressed to the souls of
the ancestors. See A. C. Kruijt,
<q>Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk
en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxix. (1895) pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Amongst
the Toboongkoo of Central Celebes
riddles are propounded at harvest and
by watchers over a corpse. See A.
C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe
en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xliv. (1900) pp. 223,
228.</note>
</p>

<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Flight
from the
demons of
sickness.</note>
Sometimes, instead of chasing the demon of disease from
their homes, savages prefer to leave him in peaceable possession,
while they themselves take to flight and attempt to
prevent him from following in their tracks. Thus when the
Patagonians were attacked by smallpox, which they attributed
to the machinations of an evil spirit, they used to abandon
their sick and flee, slashing the air with their weapons and
throwing water about in order to keep off the dreadful
pursuer; and when after several days' march they reached
a place where they hoped to be beyond his reach, they used
by way of precaution to plant all their cutting weapons with
the sharp edges turned towards the quarter from which they
had come, as if they were repelling a charge of cavalry.<note place='foot'>A. d'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans
l'Amérique Méridionale</hi>, ii. (Paris and
Strasburg, 1839-1843) p. 190.</note>
Similarly, when the Lules or Tonocotes Indians of the Gran
Chaco were attacked by an epidemic, they regularly sought
to evade it by flight, but in so doing they always followed a
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
sinuous, not a straight, course; because they said that when
the disease made after them he would be so exhausted by
the turnings and windings of the route that he would never
be able to come up with them.<note place='foot'>Pedro Lozano, <hi rend='italic'>Description Chorographica
del Terreno, Rios, Arboles, y
Animales de las dilatadissimas Provincias
del Gran Chaco, Gualamba</hi>, etc.
(Cordova, 1733) p. 100.</note> When the Indians of New
Mexico were decimated by smallpox or other infectious
disease, they used to shift their quarters every day, retreating
into the most sequestered parts of the mountains and choosing
the thorniest thickets they could find, in the hope that
the smallpox would be too afraid of scratching himself on
the thorns to follow them.<note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Natives Races of
the Pacific States</hi> (London, 1875-1876),
i. 589 note 259, quoting Arlegui, <hi rend='italic'>Chrón.
de Zacatecas</hi>, pp. 152-3, 182.</note> When some Chins on a visit to
Rangoon were attacked by cholera, they went about with
drawn swords to scare away the demon, and they spent the
day hiding under bushes so that he might not be able to
find them.<note place='foot'>Bertram S. Carey and H. N.
Tuck, <hi rend='italic'>The Chin Hills</hi>, i. (Rangoon,
1896) p. 198.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
periodic
expulsion
of evils.
Annual
expulsion
of ghosts in
Australia.</note>
The expulsion of evils, from being occasional, tends
to become periodic. It comes to be thought desirable
to have a general riddance of evil spirits at fixed times,
usually once a year, in order that the people may make a
fresh start in life, freed from all the malignant influences
which have been long accumulating about them. Some of
the Australian blacks annually expelled the ghosts of the
dead from their territory. The ceremony was witnessed by
the Rev. W. Ridley on the banks of the River Barwan. <q>A
chorus of twenty, old and young, were singing and beating
time with boomerangs.... Suddenly, from under a sheet of
bark darted a man with his body whitened by pipeclay, his
head and face coloured with lines of red and yellow, and a
tuft of feathers fixed by means of a stick two feet above the
crown of his head. He stood twenty minutes perfectly still,
gazing upwards. An aboriginal who stood by told me he
was looking for the ghosts of dead men. At last he began
to move very slowly, and soon rushed to and fro at full
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
speed, flourishing a branch as if to drive away some foes
invisible to us. When I thought this pantomime must be
almost over, ten more, similarly adorned, suddenly appeared
from behind the trees, and the whole party joined in a brisk
conflict with their mysterious assailants.... At last, after
some rapid evolutions in which they put forth all their
strength, they rested from the exciting toil which they had
kept up all night and for some hours after sunrise; they
seemed satisfied that the ghosts were driven away for
twelve months. They were performing the same ceremony
at every station along the river, and I am told it is an
annual custom.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ridley, in J. D. Lang's
<hi rend='italic'>Queensland</hi> (London, 1861), p. 441.
Compare Rev. W. Ridley, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi>
(Sydney, 1875), p. 149.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of Tuña
among the
Esquimaux
of Alaska.</note>
Certain seasons of the year mark themselves naturally
out as appropriate moments for a general expulsion of devils.
Such a moment occurs towards the close of an Arctic winter,
when the sun reappears on the horizon after an absence of
weeks or months. Accordingly, at Point Barrow, the most
northerly extremity of Alaska, and nearly of America, the
Esquimaux choose the moment of the sun's reappearance to
hunt the mischievous spirit Tuña from every house. The
ceremony was witnessed by the members of the United
States Polar Expedition, who wintered at Point Barrow. A
fire was built in front of the council-house, and an old woman
was posted at the entrance to every house. The men
gathered round the council-house, while the young women and
girls drove the spirits out of every house with their knives,
stabbing viciously under the bunk and deer-skins, and calling
upon Tuña to be gone. When they thought he had been
driven out of every hole and corner, they thrust him down
through the hole in the floor and chased him into the open
air with loud cries and frantic gestures. Meanwhile the old
woman at the entrance of the house made passes with a long
knife in the air to keep him from returning. Each party
drove the spirit towards the fire and invited him to go into
it. All were by this time drawn up in a semicircle round
the fire, when several of the leading men made specific
charges against the spirit; and each after his speech
brushed his clothes violently, calling on the spirit to leave
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
him and go into the fire. Two men now stepped forward
with rifles loaded with blank cartridges, while a third
brought a vessel of urine and flung it on the flames. At
the same time one of the men fired a shot into the fire; and as
the cloud of steam rose it received the other shot, which was
supposed to finish Tuña for the time being.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Report of the International Polar
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</hi>
(Washington, 1885), pp. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It is
said that in Thule, where the sun disappeared
below the horizon for forty
days every winter, the greatest festival
of the year was held when the luminary
reappeared. <q>It seems to me,</q> says
Procopius, who records the fact, <q>that
though the same thing happens every
year, these islanders are very much
afraid lest the sun should fail them
altogether.</q> See Procopius, <hi rend='italic'>De bello
Gothico</hi>, ii. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of Sedna
among the
Esquimaux
of Baffin
Land.</note>
In late autumn, when storms rage over the land and
break the icy fetters by which the frozen sea is as yet but
slightly bound, when the loosened floes are driven against
each other and break with loud crashes, and when the cakes
of ice are piled in wild disorder one upon another, the
Esquimaux of Baffin Land fancy they hear the voices of the
spirits who people the mischief-laden air. Then the ghosts
of the dead knock wildly at the huts, which they cannot
enter, and woe to the hapless wight whom they catch; he
soon sickens and dies. Then the phantom of a huge hairless
dog pursues the real dogs, which expire in convulsions and
cramps at sight of him. All the countless spirits of evil are
abroad, striving to bring sickness and death, foul weather
and failure in hunting on the Esquimaux. Most dreaded
of all these spectral visitants are Sedna, mistress of the
nether world, and her father, to whose share dead Esquimaux
fall. While the other spirits fill the air and the water, she
rises from under ground. It is then a busy season for
the wizards. In every house you may hear them singing
and praying, while they conjure the spirits, seated in a
mystic gloom at the back of the hut, which is dimly lit by a
lamp burning low. The hardest task of all is to drive away
Sedna, and this is reserved for the most powerful enchanter.
A rope is coiled on the floor of a large hut in such a way
as to leave a small opening at the top, which represents the
breathing hole of a seal. Two enchanters stand beside it,
one of them grasping a spear as if he were watching a seal-hole
in winter, the other holding the harpoon-line. A third
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
sorcerer sits at the back of the hut chanting a magic song to
lure Sedna to the spot. Now she is heard approaching
under the floor of the hut, breathing heavily; now she
emerges at the hole; now she is harpooned and sinks away
in angry haste, dragging the harpoon with her, while the
two men hold on to the line with all their might. The
struggle is severe, but at last by a desperate wrench she
tears herself away and returns to her dwelling in Adlivun.
When the harpoon is drawn up out of the hole it is found
to be splashed with blood, which the enchanters proudly
exhibit as a proof of their prowess. Thus Sedna and the
other evil spirits are at last driven away, and next day a
great festival is celebrated by old and young in honour of
the event. But they must still be cautious, for the wounded
Sedna is furious and will seize any one she may find outside
of his hut; so they all wear amulets on the top of their
hoods to protect themselves against her. These amulets
consist of pieces of the first garments that they wore after
birth.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
and Transactions of the Royal
Society of Canada for 1887</hi>, vol. v.
(Montreal, 1888) sect. ii. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>The Central Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1888), pp. 603 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Elsewhere,
however, the writer mentions a
different explanation of the custom of
harpooning Sedna. He says: <q>Sedna
feels kindly towards the people if they
have succeeded in cutting her. If
there is no blood on the knife, it is
an ill omen. As to the reason why
Sedna must be cut, the people say
that it is an old custom, and that it
makes her feel better, that it is the
same as giving a thirsty person drink.</q>
See Fr. Boas, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. (New York, 1901) p. 139.
However, this explanation may well be
an afterthought devised to throw light
on an old custom of which the original
meaning had been forgotten.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Koryaks.</note>
The Koryaks of the Taigonos Peninsula, in north-eastern
Asia, celebrate annually a festival after the winter solstice.
Rich men invite all their neighbours to the festival, offer a
sacrifice to <q>The-One-on-High,</q> and slaughter many reindeer
for their guests. If there is a shaman present he goes
all round the interior of the house, beating the drum and
driving away the demons (<foreign rend='italic'>kalau</foreign>). He searches all the
people in the house, and if he finds a demon's arrow sticking
in the body of one of them, he pulls it out, though naturally
the arrow is invisible to common eyes. In this way he
protects them against disease and death. If there is no
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
shaman present, the demons may be expelled by the host or
by a woman skilled in incantations.<note place='foot'>W. Jochelson, <hi rend='italic'>The Koryak</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1908), p. 88 (<hi rend='italic'>The
Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>, vol. vi.,
<hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Iroquois and
the
Cherokees..</note>
The Iroquois inaugurated the new year in January,
February, or March (the time varied) with a <q>festival of
dreams</q> like that which the Hurons observed on special
occasions.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</note> The whole ceremonies lasted several days, or
even weeks, and formed a kind of saturnalia. Men and
women, variously disguised, went from wigwam to wigwam
smashing and throwing down whatever they came across.
It was a time of general license; the people were supposed
to be out of their senses, and therefore not to be responsible
for what they did. Accordingly, many seized the opportunity
of paying off old scores by belabouring obnoxious
persons, drenching them with ice-cold water, and covering
them with filth or hot ashes. Others seized burning brands
or coals and flung them at the heads of the first persons
they met. The only way of escaping from these persecutors
was to guess what they had dreamed of. On one day of the
festival the ceremony of driving away evil spirits from the
village took place. Men clothed in the skins of wild beasts,
their faces covered with hideous masks, and their hands
with the shell of the tortoise, went from hut to hut making
frightful noises; in every hut they took the fuel from the fire
and scattered the embers and ashes about the floor with their
hands. The general confession of sins which preceded the
festival was probably a preparation for the public expulsion
of evil influences; it was a way of stripping the people of
their moral burdens, that these might be collected and cast
out. This New Year festival is still celebrated by some of
the heathen Iroquois, though it has been shorn of its former
turbulence. A conspicuous feature in the ceremony is now
the sacrifice of the White Dog, but this appears to have been
added to the festival in comparatively modern times, and
does not figure in the oldest descriptions of the ceremonies.
We shall return to it later on.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1656, pp.
26-28 (Canadian reprint, Quebec,
1858); J. F. Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des
Sauvages Ameriquains</hi> (Paris, 1724),
i. 367-369; Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la
Nouvelle France</hi>, vi. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Timothy
Dwight, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in New England and
New York</hi> (London, 1823), iv. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
L. H. Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi>
(Rochester, 1851), pp. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Mrs.
E. A. Smith, <q>Myths of the Iroquois,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Second Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1883), pp.
112 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Horatio Hale, <q>Iroquois
Sacrifice of the White Dog,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American
Antiquarian</hi>, vii. (1885) pp. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
W. M. Beauchamp, <q>Iroquois White
Dog Feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> pp. 235 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> <q>They
had one day in the year which might
be called the Festival of Fools; for in
fact they pretended to be mad, rushing
from hut to hut, so that if they ill-treated
any one or carried off anything,
they would say next day, <q>I was mad;
I had not my senses about me.</q> And
the others would accept this explanation
and exact no vengeance</q> (L. Hennepin,
<hi rend='italic'>Description de la Louisiane</hi>, Paris,
1683, pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> A great annual festival of
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
the Cherokee Indians was the Propitiation, <q>Cementation,</q>
or Purification festival. <q>It was celebrated shortly after the
first new moon of autumn, and consisted of a multiplicity of
rigorous rites, fastings, ablutions, and purifications. Among
the most important functionaries on the occasion were seven
exorcisers or cleansers, whose duty it was, at a certain stage
of the proceedings, to drive away evil and purify the town.
Each one bore in his hand a white rod of sycamore. <q>The
leader, followed by the others, walked around the national
heptagon, and coming to the treasure or store-house to the
west of it, they lashed the eaves of the roofs with their rods.
The leader then went to another house, followed by the
others, singing, and repeated the same ceremony until every
house was purified.</q> This ceremony was repeated daily
during the continuance of the festival. In performing their
ablutions they went into the water, and allowed their old
clothes to be carried away by the stream, by which means
they supposed their impurities removed.</q><note place='foot'>J. H. Payne, quoted in <q>Observations
on the Creek and Cherokee
Indians, by W. Bartram, 1789, with
prefatory and supplementary notes by
E. G. Squier,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
American Ethnological Society</hi>, vol. iii.
Part i. (1853) p. 78.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of evils
among the
Incas of
Peru.</note>
In September the Incas of Peru celebrated a festival
called Situa, the object of which was to banish from the
capital and its vicinity all disease and trouble. The festival
fell in September because the rains begin about this time,
and with the first rains there was generally much sickness.
And the melancholy begotten by the inclemency of the
weather and the sickliness of the season may well have been
heightened by the sternness of a landscape which at all
times is fitted to oppress the mind with a sense of desolation
and gloom. For Cuzco, the capital of the Incas and the
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
scene of the ceremony, lies in a high upland valley, bare and
treeless, shut in on every side by the most arid and forbidding
mountains.<note place='foot'>C. Gay, <q>Fragment d'un voyage
dans le Chili et au Cusco patrie des
anciens Incas,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie</hi> (Paris), ii. Série, xix.
(1843) pp. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As a preparation for the festival the
people fasted on the first day of the moon after the
autumnal equinox. Having fasted during the day, and
the night being come, they baked a coarse paste of
maize. This paste was made of two sorts. One was
kneaded with the blood of children aged from five to ten
years, the blood being obtained by bleeding the children
between the eyebrows. These two kinds of paste were
baked separately, because they were for different uses. Each
family assembled at the house of the eldest brother to
celebrate the feast; and those who had no elder brother
went to the house of their next relation of greater age. On
the same night all who had fasted during the day washed
their bodies, and taking a little of the blood-kneaded paste,
rubbed it over their head, face, breast, shoulders, arms, and
legs. They did this in order that the paste might take away
all their infirmities. After this the head of the family
anointed the threshold with the same paste, and left it there
as a token that the inmates of the house had performed their
ablutions and cleansed their bodies. Meantime the High
Priest performed the same ceremonies in the temple of the
Sun. As soon as the Sun rose, all the people worshipped
and besought him to drive all evils out of the city, and then
they broke their fast with the paste that had been kneaded
without blood. When they had paid their worship and
broken their fast, which they did at a stated hour, in order
that all might adore the Sun as one man, an Inca of the
blood royal came forth from the fortress, as a messenger of
the Sun, richly dressed, with his mantle girded round his
body, and a lance in his hand. The lance was decked with
feathers of many hues, extending from the blade to the
socket, and fastened with rings of gold. He ran down the
hill from the fortress brandishing his lance, till he reached
the centre of the great square, where stood the golden urn,
like a fountain, that was used for the sacrifice of the fermented
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
juice of the maize. Here four other Incas of the blood
royal awaited him, each with a lance in his hand, and his
mantle girded up to run. The messenger touched their four
lances with his lance, and told them that the Sun bade them,
as his messengers, drive the evils out of the city. The four
Incas then separated and ran down the four royal roads
which led out of the city to the four quarters of the world.
While they ran, all the people, great and small, came to the
doors of their houses, and with great shouts of joy and gladness
shook their clothes, as if they were shaking off dust,
while they cried, <q>Let the evils be gone. How greatly
desired has this festival been by us. O Creator of all things,
permit us to reach another year, that we may see another
feast like this.</q> After they had shaken their clothes, they
passed their hands over their heads, faces, arms, and legs, as
if in the act of washing. All this was done to drive the
evils out of their houses, that the messengers of the Sun
might banish them from the city; and it was done not only
in the streets through which the Incas ran, but generally in
all quarters of the city. Moreover, they all danced, the Inca
himself amongst them, and bathed in the rivers and
fountains, saying that their maladies would come out of
them. Then they took great torches of straw, bound round
with cords. These they lighted, and passed from one to the
other, striking each other with them, and saying, <q>Let all
harm go away.</q> Meanwhile the runners ran with their
lances for a quarter of a league outside the city, where they
found four other Incas ready, who received the lances from
their hands and ran with them. Thus the lances were
carried by relays of runners for a distance of five or six
leagues, at the end of which the runners washed themselves
and their weapons in rivers, and set up the lances, in sign of
a boundary within which the banished evils might not
return.<note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>Royal Commentaries
of the Yncas</hi>, translated by
(Sir) Clements R. Markham (Hakluyt
Society, London, 1869-1871), Part i.
bk. vii. ch. 6, vol. ii. pp. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Molina, <q>Fables and Rites of the
Yncas,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Rites and Laws of the
Yncas</hi> (Hakluyt Society, 1873), pp. 20
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Indies</hi>, bk. v. ch. 28, vol. ii. pp. 375
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Hakluyt Society, London, 1880).
The accounts of Garcilasso and Molina
are somewhat discrepant, but this may
be explained by the statement of the
latter that <q>in one year they added,
and in another they reduced the number
of ceremonies, according to circumstances.</q>
Molina places the festival
in August, Garcilasso and Acosta in
September. According to Garcilasso
there were only four runners in Cuzco;
according to Molina there were four
hundred. Acosta's account is very
brief. In the description given in the
text features have been borrowed from
all three accounts, where these seemed
consistent with each other.</note>
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
negroes of
Guinea.</note>
The negroes of Guinea annually banish the devil from
all their towns with much ceremony at a time set apart for the
purpose. At Axim, on the Gold Coast, this annual expulsion
is preceded by a feast of eight days, during which mirth and
jollity, skipping, dancing, and singing prevail, and <q>a perfect
lampooning liberty is allowed, and scandal so highly exalted,
that they may freely sing of all the faults, villanies, and
frauds of their superiors as well as inferiors, without punishment,
or so much as the least interruption.</q> On the eighth
day they hunt out the devil with a dismal cry, running after
him and pelting him with sticks, stones, and whatever comes
to hand. When they have driven him far enough out of
the town, they all return. In this way he is expelled from
more than a hundred towns at the same time. To make
sure that he does not return to their houses, the women
wash and scour all their wooden and earthen vessels,
<q>to free them from all uncleanness and the devil.</q><note place='foot'>W. Bosman, <q>Description of the
Coast of Guinea,</q> in J. Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi. (London,
1814) p. 402; Pierre Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La
Côte des Esclaves</hi> (Paris, 1885), p. 395.</note> A
later writer tells us that <q>on the Gold Coast there are
stated occasions, when the people turn out <foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign> (generally
at night) with clubs and torches to drive away the evil
spirits from their towns. At a given signal, the whole
community start up, commence a most hideous howling,
beat about in every nook and corner of their dwellings, then
rush into the streets, with their torches and clubs, like so
many frantic maniacs, beat the air, and scream at the top
of their voices, until some one announces the departure of
the spirits through some gate of the town, when they are
pursued several miles into the woods, and warned not to
come back. After this the people breathe easier, sleep more
quietly, have better health, and the town is once more
cheered by an abundance of food.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Leighton Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western
Africa</hi> (London, 1856), p. 217.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
in Benin.</note>
The ceremony as it is practised at Gatto, in Benin, has
been described by an English traveller. He says: <q>It was
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
about this time that I witnessed a strange ceremony, peculiar
to this people, called the time of the <q>grand devils.</q> Eight
men were dressed in a most curious manner, having a dress
made of bamboo about their bodies, and a cap on the head,
of various colours and ornamented with red feathers taken
from the parrot's tail; round the legs were twisted strings of
shells, which made a clattering noise as they walked, and the
face and hands of each individual were covered with a net.
These strange beings go about the town, by day and by
night, for the term of one month, uttering the most discordant
and frightful noises; no one durst venture out at
night for fear of being killed or seriously maltreated by these
fellows, who are then especially engaged in driving the evil
spirits from the town. They go round to all the chief's
houses, and in addition to the noise they make, perform
some extraordinary feats in tumbling and gymnastics, for
which they receive a few cowries.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of Captain James
Fawckner's Travels on the Coast of
Benin, West Africa</hi> (London, 1837),
pp. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
at Cape
Coast
Castle.</note>
At Cape Coast Castle, on the Gold Coast, the ceremony
was witnessed on the ninth of October 1844 by an
Englishman, who has described it as follows: <q>To-night the
annual custom of driving the evil spirit, Abonsam, out of
the town has taken place. As soon as the eight o'clock gun
fired in the fort the people began firing muskets in their
houses, turning all their furniture out of doors, beating about
in every corner of the rooms with sticks, etc., and screaming
as loudly as possible, in order to frighten the devil. Being
driven out of the houses, as they imagine, they sallied forth
into the streets, throwing lighted torches about, shouting,
screaming, beating sticks together, rattling old pans, making
the most horrid noise, in order to drive him out of the town
into the sea. The custom is preceded by four weeks' dead
silence; no gun is allowed to be fired, no drum to be beaten,
no palaver to be made between man and man. If, during
these weeks, two natives should disagree and make a noise
in the town, they are immediately taken before the king and
fined heavily. If a dog or pig, sheep or goat be found at
large in the street, it may be killed, or taken by anyone, the
former owner not being allowed to demand any compensation.
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
This silence is designed to deceive Abonsam, that, being off
his guard, he may be taken by surprise, and frightened out
of the place. If anyone die during the silence, his relatives
are not allowed to weep until the four weeks have been
completed.</q><note place='foot'><q>Extracts from Diary of the
late Rev. John Martin, Wesleyan
Missionary in West Africa, 1843-1848,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, xii. (1912) pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare Major A. J. N. Tremearne,
<hi rend='italic'>The Tailed Head-hunters of Nigeria</hi>
(London, 1912), pp. 202 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of evils
on the
Niger
and in
Abyssinia.</note>
At Onitsha, on the Niger, Mr. J. C. Taylor witnessed
the celebration of New Year's Day by the negroes. It fell
on the twentieth of December 1858. Every family brought
a firebrand out into the street, threw it away, and exclaimed
as they returned, <q>The gods of the new year! New Year
has come round again.</q> Mr. Taylor adds, <q>The meaning
of the custom seems to be that the fire is to drive away the
old year with its sorrows and evils, and to embrace the new
year with hearty reception.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>
(London, 1859), p. 320.</note> Of all Abyssinian festivals
that of Mascal or the Cross is celebrated with the greatest
pomp. During the whole of the interval between St. John's
day and the feast a desultory warfare is waged betwixt the
youth of opposite sexes in the towns. They all sally out in
the evenings, the boys armed with nettles or thistles and
the girls with gourds containing a filthy solution of all sorts
of abominations. When any of the hostile parties meet,
they begin by reviling each other in the foulest language,
from which they proceed to personal violence, the boys
stinging the girls with their nettles, while the girls discharge
their stink-pots in the faces of their adversaries. These
hostilities may perhaps be regarded as a preparation for the
festival of the Cross. The eve of the festival witnesses a
ceremony which doubtless belongs to the world-wide class of
customs we are dealing with. At sunset a discharge of firearms
takes place from all the principal houses. <q>Then
every one provides himself with a torch, and during the
early part of the night bonfires are kindled, and the people
parade the town, carrying their lighted torches in their
hands. They go through their houses, too, poking a light
into every dark corner in the hall, under the couches, in the
stables, kitchen, etc., as if looking for something lost, and
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
calling out, <q>Akho, akhoky! turn out the spinage, and
bring in the porridge; Mascal is come!</q>... After this
they play, and poke fun and torches at each other.</q> Next
morning, while it is still dark, bonfires are kindled on the
heights near the towns, and people rise early to see them.
The rising sun of Mascal finds the whole population of
Abyssinia awake.<note place='foot'>Mansfield Parkyns, <hi rend='italic'>Life in
Abyssinia</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1868), pp. 285 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of spirits
at the yam
harvest in
New
Guinea.
Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Hos of
West
Africa
before
eating the
new yams.</note>
Sometimes the date of the annual expulsion of devils is
fixed with reference to the agricultural seasons. Thus at
Kiriwina, in South-Eastern New Guinea, when the new yams
had been harvested, the people feasted and danced for many
days, and a great deal of property, such as armlets, native
money, and so forth, was displayed conspicuously on a platform
erected for the purpose. When the festivities were
over, all the people gathered together and expelled the spirits
from the village by shouting, beating the posts of the houses,
and overturning everything under which a wily spirit might
be supposed to lurk. The explanation which the people
gave to a missionary was that they had entertained and
feasted the spirits and provided them with riches, and it was
now time for them to take their departure. Had they not
seen the dances, and heard the songs, and gorged themselves
on the souls of the yams, and appropriated the souls of the
money and all the other fine things set out on the platform?
What more could the spirits want? So out they must go.<note place='foot'>George Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians
and Polynesian</hi> (London, 1910), pp.
413 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Hos of Togoland in West Africa the expulsion of
evils is performed annually before the people eat the new
yams.<note place='foot'>As to the ceremony of eating the
new yams, see <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and
of the Wild</hi>, ii. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The chiefs meet together and summon the priests
and magicians. They tell them that the people are now to eat
the new yams and to be merry, therefore they must cleanse
the town and remove the evils. For that purpose they take
leaves of the <foreign rend='italic'>adzu</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>wo</foreign> trees, together with creepers and
ashes. The leaves and creepers they bind fast to a pole of
an <foreign rend='italic'>adzu</foreign> tree, while they pray that the evil spirits, the witches,
and all the ills in the town may pass into the bundle and
be bound. Then they make a paste out of the ashes and
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
smear it on the bundle, saying, <q>We smear it on the face of
all the evil ones who are in this bundle, in order that they
may not be able to see.</q> With that they throw the bundle,
that is, the pole wrapt in leaves and creepers, on the ground
and they all mock at it. Then they prepare a medicine
and take the various leaf-wrapt poles, into which they have
conjured and bound up all mischief, carry them out of the
town, and set them up in the earth on various roads leading
into the town. When they have done this, they say that
they have banished the evils from the town and shut the
door in their face. With the medicine, which the elders
have prepared, all men, women, children and chiefs wash
their faces. After that everybody goes home to sweep out
his house and homestead. The ground in front of the
homesteads is also swept, so that the town is thoroughly
cleansed. All the stalks of grass and refuse of stock yams
that have been swept together they cast out of the town,
and they rail at the stock yams. In the course of the
night the elders assemble and bind a toad to a young palm-leaf.
They say that they will now sweep out the town and
end the ceremony. For that purpose they drag the toad
through the whole town in the direction of Mount Adaklu.
When that has been done, the priests say that they will now
remove the sicknesses. In the evening they give public
notice that they are about to go on the road, and that
therefore no one may light a fire on the hearth or eat food.
Next morning the women of the town sweep out their
houses and hearths and deposit the sweepings on broken
wooden plates. Many wrap themselves in torn mats and
tattered clothes; others swathe themselves in grass and
creepers. While they do so, they pray, saying, <q>All ye
sicknesses that are in our body and plague us, we are come
to-day to throw you out.</q> When they start to do so, the
priest gives orders that everybody is to scream once and at
the same time to smite his mouth. In a moment they all
scream, smite their mouths, and run as fast as they can in
the direction of Mount Adaklu. As they run, they say,
<q>Out to-day! Out to-day! That which kills anybody, out
to-day! Ye evil spirits, out to-day! and all that causes our
heads to ache, out to-day! Anlo and Adaklu are the places
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
whither all ill shall betake itself!</q> Now on Mount Adaklu
there grows a <foreign rend='italic'>klo</foreign> tree, and when the people have come to
the tree they throw everything away and return home. On
their return they wash themselves with the medicine which
is set forth in the streets; then they enter their houses.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 305-307. At
Kotedougou a French officer saw a
number of disguised men called <foreign rend='italic'>dou</foreign>
dancing and performing various antics
about the houses, under the trees, and in
the fields. Hemp and palm leaves were
sewn on their garments and they wore
caps of hemp surmounted by a crest of
red-ochred wood, sometimes by a
wooden beak of a bird. He gathered
that the ceremony takes place at the
beginning of winter, and he thought
that the processions <q>are perhaps
intended to drive away the evil spirits
at the season of tillage or perhaps also
to procure rain.</q> See Le Capitaine
Binger, <hi rend='italic'>Du Niger au Golfe de Guinée
par le pays de Kong et le Mossi</hi> (Paris,
1892), pp. 378-380.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Hos of
North-Eastern
India at
harvest.</note>
Among the Hos of North-Eastern India the great festival
of the year is the harvest home, held in January, when the
granaries are full of grain, and the people, to use their own
expression, are full of devilry. <q>They have a strange notion
that at this period, men and women are so overcharged with
vicious propensities, that it is absolutely necessary for the
safety of the person to let off steam by allowing for a time
full vent to the passions.</q> The ceremonies open with a
sacrifice to the village god of three fowls, a cock and
two hens, one of which must be black. Along with them
are offered flowers of the Palas tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Butea frondosa</foreign>), bread
made from rice-flour, and sesamum seeds. These offerings
are presented by the village priest, who prays that during
the year about to begin they and their children may
be preserved from all misfortune and sickness, and that they
may have seasonable rain and good crops. Prayer is also
made in some places for the souls of the dead. At this
time an evil spirit is supposed to infest the place, and to get
rid of it men, women, and children go in procession round
and through every part of the village with sticks in their
hands, as if beating for game, singing a wild chant, and
shouting vociferously, till they feel assured that the evil
spirit must have fled. Then they give themselves up to
feasting and drinking rice-beer, till they are in a fit state for
the wild debauch which follows. The festival now <q>becomes
a saturnale, during which servants forget their duty to their
masters, children their reverence for parents, men their
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
respect for women, and women all notions of modesty,
delicacy, and gentleness; they become raging bacchantes.</q>
Usually the Hos are quiet and reserved in manner, decorous
and gentle to women. But during this festival <q>their natures
appear to undergo a temporary change. Sons and daughters
revile their parents in gross language, and parents their
children; men and women become almost like animals in
the indulgence of their amorous propensities.</q> The festival
is not held simultaneously in all the villages. The time
during which it is celebrated in the different villages of a
district may be from a month to six weeks, and by a preconcerted
arrangement the celebration begins at each village
on a different date and lasts three or four days; so the
inhabitants of each may take part in a long series of orgies.
On these occasions the utmost liberty is given to the girls,
who may absent themselves for days with the young men
of another village; parents at such times never attempt to
lay their daughters under any restraint. The Mundaris,
kinsmen and neighbours of the Hos, keep the festival in
much the same manner. <q>The resemblance to a Saturnale
is very complete, as at this festival the farm labourers are
feasted by their masters, and allowed the utmost freedom of
speech in addressing them. It is the festival of the harvest
home; the termination of one year's toil, and a slight respite
from it before they commence again.</q><note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi> (Calcutta, 1872), pp. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
We have seen that among the Pondos
of South Africa the harvest festival of
first-fruits is in like manner a period
of licence and debauchery. See
<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>,
ii. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Hindoo
Koosh
tribes at
harvest. Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Khonds at
sowing.</note>
Amongst some of the Hindoo Koosh tribes, as among
the Hos and Mundaris, the expulsion of devils takes place
after harvest. When the last crop of autumn has been got
in, it is thought necessary to drive away evil spirits from
the granaries. A kind of porridge called <foreign rend='italic'>mool</foreign> is eaten, and
the head of the family takes his matchlock and fires it into
the floor. Then, going outside, he sets to work loading and
firing till his powder-horn is exhausted, while all his neighbours
are similarly employed. The next day is spent in
rejoicings. In Chitral this festival is called <q>devil-driving.</q><note place='foot'>Major J. Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the
Hindoo Koosh</hi> (Calcutta, 1880), p.
103.</note>
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
On the other hand the Khonds of India expel the devils at
seed-time instead of at harvest. At this time they worship
Pitteri Pennu, the god of increase and of gain in every shape.
On the first day of the festival a rude car is made of a
basket set upon a few sticks, tied upon bamboo rollers for
wheels. The priest takes this car first to the house of the
lineal head of the tribe, to whom precedence is given in all
ceremonies connected with agriculture. Here he receives a
little of each kind of seed and some feathers. He then
takes the car to all the other houses in the village, each of
which contributes the same things. Lastly, the car is
conducted to a field without the village, attended by all
the young men, who beat each other and strike the air
violently with long sticks. The seed thus carried out is
called the share of the <q>evil spirits, spoilers of the seed.</q>
<q>These are considered to be driven out with the car; and
when it and its contents are abandoned to them, they are
held to have no excuse for interfering with the rest of the
seed-corn.</q> Next day each household kills a hog over the
seed for the year, and prays to Pitteri Pennu, saying, <q>O
Pitteri Pennu! this seed we shall sow to-morrow. Some
of us, your suppliants, will have a great return, some a
small return. Let the least favoured have a full basket,
let the most favoured have many baskets. Give not this
seed to ant, or rat, or hog. Let the stems which shall
spring from it be so stout that the earth shall tremble
under them. Let the rain find no hole or outlet whereby
to escape from our fields. Make the earth soft like the
ashes of cow-dung. To him who has no iron wherewith to
shoe his plough, make the wood of the <foreign rend='italic'>doh</foreign>-tree like iron.
Provide other food than our seed for the parrot, the crow,
and all the fowls and beasts of the jungle. Let not the
white ant destroy the roots, nor the wild hog crush the
stem to get at the fruit; and make our crops of all
kinds have a better flavour than that of those of any
other country.</q> The elders then feast upon the hogs.
The young men are excluded from the repast, but
enjoy the privilege of waylaying and pelting with
jungle-fruit their elders as they return from the feast.
Upon the third day the lineal head of the tribe goes
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
out and sows his seed, after which all the rest may
do so.<note place='foot'>W. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>Memorials of
Service in India from the Correspondence
of the late Major S. C. Macpherson</hi>
(London, 1865), pp. 357
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Possibly this case belongs more
strictly to the class of mediate expulsions,
the devils being driven out
upon the car. Perhaps, however, the
car with its contents is regarded rather
as a bribe to induce them to go than
as a vehicle in which they are actually
carted away. Anyhow it is convenient
to take this case along with those
other expulsions of demons which are
the accompaniment of an agricultural
festival.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of disease
in Chota
Nagpur.
Annual
expulsion
of demons
among the
Mossos of
China.</note>
In Ranchi, a district of Chota Nagpur in Bengal, a
ceremony is performed every year by one of the clans to
drive away disease. Should it prove ineffectual, all the
villagers assemble by night and walk about the village in a
body armed with clubs, searching for the disease. Everything
they find outside of the houses they smash. Hence on that
day the people throw out their chipped crockery, old pots
and pans, and other trash into the courtyard, so that when
the search party comes along they may belabour the heap
of rubbish to their heart's content; the crash of shattered
crockery and the clatter of shivered pans indicates, we are
told, that the disease has departed; perhaps it might be
more strictly accurate to say that they have frightened it
away. At all events a very loud noise is made <q>so that
the disease may not remain hidden anywhere.</q><note place='foot'>H. C. Streatfield, <q>Ranchi,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal</hi>, lxxii. Part iii. (Calcutta,
1904) p. 36.</note> In a
village of the Mossos, an aboriginal tribe of south-western
China, a French traveller witnessed the annual ceremony of
the expulsion of devils. Two magicians, wearing mitres of
red pasteboard, went from house to house, attended by a
troop of children, their faces smeared with flour, some of
whom carried torches and others cymbals, while all made
a deafening noise. After dancing a wild dance in the
courtyard of the house, they entered the principal room,
where the performers were regaled with a draught of
ardent spirits, of which they sprinkled a few drops on the
floor. Then the magicians recited their spells to oblige
the evil spirits to quit the chamber and the good spirits
to enter it. At the end of each phrase, the children, speaking
for the spirits, answered with a shout, <q>We go</q> or
<q>We come.</q> That concluded the ceremony in the house,
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
and the noisy procession filed out to repeat it in the
next.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Le Tour du Monde</hi>, iii. (Paris,
1897) pp. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, quoting <hi rend='italic'>Aux
sources de l'Irraouaddi, d'Hanoï à
Calcutta par terre</hi>, par M. E. Roux,
Troisième Partie.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Periodical
expulsion
of demons
in Bali.</note>
The people of Bali, an island to the east of Java, have
periodical expulsions of devils upon a great scale. Generally
the time chosen for the expulsion is the day of the <q>dark
moon</q> in the ninth month. When the demons have been
long unmolested the country is said to be <q>warm,</q> and the
priest issues orders to expel them by force, lest the whole of
Bali should be rendered uninhabitable. On the day appointed
the people of the village or district assemble at the principal
temple. Here at a cross-road offerings are set out for the
devils. After prayers have been recited by the priests, the
blast of a horn summons the devils to partake of the meal
which has been prepared for them. At the same time a
number of men step forward and light their torches at
the holy lamp which burns before the chief priest. Immediately
afterwards, followed by the bystanders, they
spread in all directions and march through the streets
and lanes crying, <q>Depart! go away!</q> Wherever they
pass, the people who have stayed at home hasten, by a
deafening clatter on doors, beams, rice-blocks, and so
forth, to take their share in the expulsion of devils. Thus
chased from the houses, the fiends flee to the banquet
which has been set out for them; but here the priest
receives them with curses which finally drive them from
the district. When the last devil has taken his departure,
the uproar is succeeded by a dead silence, which lasts
during the next day also. The devils, it is thought, are
anxious to return to their old homes, and in order to make
them think that Bali is not Bali but some desert island, no
one may stir from his own abode for twenty-four hours.
Even ordinary household work, including cooking, is discontinued.
Only the watchmen may shew themselves in
the streets. Wreaths of thorns and leaves are hung at all
the entrances to warn strangers from entering. Not till the
third day is this state of siege raised, and even then it is
forbidden to work at the rice-fields or to buy and sell
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
in the market. Most people still stay at home, striving
to while away the time with cards and dice.<note place='foot'>R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het
eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, N.S., viii. (1879) pp.
58-60. Van Eck's account is reprinted
in J. Jacobs's <hi rend='italic'>Eenigen tijd onder de
Baliërs</hi> (Batavia, 1883), pp. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
According to another writer, each
village may choose its own day for
expelling the devils, but the ceremony
must always be performed at the new
moon. A necessary preliminary is to
mark exactly the boundaries of the
village territory, and this is done by
stretching the leaves of a certain palm
across the roads at the boundaries.
See F. A. Liefrinck, <q>Bijdrage tot
de kennis van het eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiii. (1890) pp. 246
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the <q>dark moon</q> it is to
be observed that some eastern nations,
particularly the Hindoos and the
Burmese, divide the monthly cycle of
the moon into two parts, which they
call the light moon and the dark moon
respectively. The light moon is the
first half of the month, when the
luminary is waxing; the dark moon
is the second half of the month, when
the luminary is waning. See Francis
Buchanan, <q>On the Religion and
Literature of the Burmas,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Asiatick
Researches</hi>, vi. (London, 1801) p. 171.
The Balinese have no doubt derived
the distinction, like much else, from
the Hindoos.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of the
fire-spirit
among
the Shans.
Annual
ceremony
in Fiji. Annual
ceremony
in Tumleo.</note>
The Shans of Southern China annually expel the fire-spirit.
The ceremony was witnessed by the English Mission
under Colonel Sladen on the thirteenth of August 1868.
Bullocks and cows were slaughtered in the market-place;
the meat was all sold, part of it was cooked and eaten,
while the rest was fired out of guns at sundown. The
pieces of flesh which fell on the land were supposed to
become mosquitoes, those which fell in the water were
believed to turn into leeches. In the evening the chief's
retainers beat gongs and blew trumpets; and when darkness
had set in, torches were lit, and a party, preceded by
the musicians, searched the central court for the fire-spirit,
who is supposed to lurk about at this season with evil intent.
They then ransacked all the rooms and the gardens, throwing
the light of the torches into every nook and corner
where the evil spirit might find a hiding-place.<note place='foot'>J. Anderson, <hi rend='italic'>Mandalay to Momien</hi>
(London, 1876), p. 308.</note> In some
parts of Fiji an annual ceremony took place which has
much the aspect of an expulsion of devils. The time of
its celebration was determined by the appearance of a
certain fish or sea-slug (<foreign rend='italic'>balolo</foreign>) which swarms out in dense
shoals from the coral reefs on a single day of the
year, usually in the last quarter of the moon in November.
The appearance of the sea-slugs was the signal for a general
feast at those places where they were taken. An influential
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
man ascended a tree and prayed to the spirit of the sky
for good crops, fair winds, and so on. Thereupon a
tremendous clatter, with drumming and shouting, was raised
by all the people in their houses for about half an hour.
This was followed by a dead quiet for four days, during
which the people feasted on the sea-slug. All this time no
work of any kind might be done, not even a leaf plucked
nor the offal removed from the houses. If a noise was made
in any house, as by a child crying, a forfeit was at once
exacted by the chief. At daylight on the expiry of the
fourth night the whole town was in an uproar; men and
boys scampered about, knocking with clubs and sticks
at the doors of the houses and crying <q>Sinariba!</q> This
concluded the ceremony.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>United States Exploring Expedition,
Ethnography and Philology</hi>, by
H. Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), pp. 67
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the U.S.
Exploring Expedition</hi>, New Edition
(New York, 1851), iii. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 342.
According to the latter writer, the sea-slug
was eaten by the men alone, who
lived during the four days in the
temple, while the women and boys
remained shut up in their houses. As
to the annual appearance and catch of
the sea-slug in the seas of Fiji, see
further B. Seeman, <hi rend='italic'>Viti, an Account
of a Government Mission to the Vitian
or Fijian Islands in the Years 1860-1862</hi>
(Cambridge, 1862), pp. 59-61;
Basil Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Fijians</hi> (London,
1908), pp. 324-327. A somewhat
different account of the appearance of
the slug (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Palolo veridis</foreign>) in the Samoan
Sea is given from personal observation
by Dr. George Brown. He says:
<q>This annelid, as far as I can remember,
is about 8 or 12 inches long,
and somewhat thicker than ordinary
piping-cord. It is found only on two
mornings in the year, and the time
when it will appear and disappear can
be accurately predicted. As a general
rule only a few <foreign rend='italic'>palolo</foreign> are found on the
first day, though occasionally the large
quantity may appear first; but, as a
rule, the large quantity appears on the
second morning. And it is only found
on these mornings for a very limited
period, viz. from early dawn to about
seven o'clock, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> for about two hours.
It then disappears until the following
year, except in some rare instances,
when it is found for the same limited
period in the following month after its
first appearance. I kept records of the
time, and of the state of the moon, for
some years, with the following result:
that it always appeared on two out of
the following three days, viz. the day
before, the day of, and the day after
the last quarter of the October moon.</q>
See George Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians
and Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), pp.
135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The slug is also caught in
the sea off Samoa, according to one
account, at intervals of six months.
One of its appearances takes place on
the eighth day after the new moon of
October. So regular are the appearances
of the creature that the Samoans
reckon their time by them. See E.
Boisse, <q>Les îles Samoa, Nukunono,
Fakaafo, Wallis et Hoorn,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), vi.
Série, x. (1875) pp. 430 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In
antiquity every year vast shoals of
a small fish used to ascend the river
Olynthiac from the lake of Bolbe in
Macedonia, and all the people of
the neighbourhood caught and salted
great store of them. They thought
that the fish were sent to them by
Bolbe, the mother of Olynthus, and
they noted it as a curious fact that
the fish never swam higher up than
the tomb of Olynthus, which stood
on the bank of the river Olynthiac.
The shoals always made their appearance
in the months of Anthesterion
and Elaphebolion, and as the people of
Apollonia (a city on the bank of the
lake) celebrated their festival of the
dead at that season, formerly in the
month of Elaphebolion, but afterwards
in the month of Anthesterion, they
imagined that the fish came at that
time on purpose. See Athenaeus,
viii. 11, p. 334 <hi rend='smallcaps'>f.</hi></note> The natives of Tumleo, a small
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
island off German New Guinea, also catch the sea-slug
in the month of November, and at this season they observe
a curious ceremony, which may perhaps be explained
as an expulsion of evils or demons. The lads, and
sometimes grown men with them, go in troops into the
forest to search for grass-arrows (<foreign rend='italic'>räng</foreign>). When they have
collected a store of these arrows, they take sides and, armed
with little bows, engage in a regular battle. The arrows fly
as thick as hail, and though no one is killed, many receive skin
wounds and are covered with blood. The Catholic missionary
who reports the custom could not ascertain the reasons
for observing it. Perhaps one set of combatants represents
the demons or embodied evils of the year, who are defeated
and driven away by the champions of the people. The
month in which these combats take place (November
and the beginning of December) is sometimes named after
the grass-arrows and sometimes after the sea-slug.<note place='foot'>M. J. Erdweg, <q>Die Bewohner der
Insel Tumleo Berlinhafen, Deutsch-New-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) pp. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
in Japan.</note>
On the last night of the year there is observed in most
Japanese houses a ceremony called <q>the exorcism of the
evil spirit.</q> It is performed by the head of the family.
Clad in his finest robes, with a sword, if he has the right of
bearing one, at his waist, he goes through all the rooms at
the hour of midnight, carrying in his left hand a box of
roasted beans on a lacquered stand. From time to time he
dips his right hand into the box and scatters a handful
of beans on a mat, pronouncing a cabalistic form of words
of which the meaning is, <q>Go forth, demons! Enter
riches!</q><note place='foot'>A. Humbert, <hi rend='italic'>Le Japon illustré</hi>
(Paris, 1870), ii. 326.</note> According to another account, the ceremony
takes place on the night before the beginning of spring, and
the roasted beans are flung against the walls as well as on
the floors of the houses.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, v. (Jena, 1869) p. 367.</note> While the duty of expelling the
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
devils should, strictly speaking, be discharged by the head of
the house, it is often delegated to a servant. Whether
master or servant, the performer goes by the name of year-man
(<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>toshi-otoko</foreign>), the rite being properly performed on the
last day of the year. The words <q>Out with the devils</q>
(<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Oni ha soto</foreign>) are pronounced by him in a loud voice, but
the words <q>In with the luck</q> (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>fuku ha uchi</foreign>) in a low tone.
In the Shogun's palace the ceremony was performed by a
year-man specially appointed for the purpose, who scattered
parched beans in all the principal rooms. These beans were
picked up by the women of the palace, who wrapped as
many of them in paper as they themselves were years old,
and then flung them backwards out of doors. Sometimes
people who had reached an unlucky year would gather these
beans, one for each year of their life and one over, and wrap
them in paper together with a small copper coin which had
been rubbed over their body to transfer the ill-luck. The
packet was afterwards thrown away at a cross-road. This was
called <q>flinging away ill-luck</q> (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>yaku sute</foreign>).<note place='foot'>W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (London,
1905), p. 309.</note> According to
Lafcadio Hearn, the casting-out of devils from the houses is
performed by a professional exorciser for a small fee, and
the peas which he scatters about the house are afterwards
swept up and carefully kept until the first peal of thunder is
heard in spring, when it is customary to cook and eat some
of them. After the demons have been thoroughly expelled
from a house, a charm is set up over the door to prevent them
from returning: it consists of a wooden skewer with a holly
leaf and the dried head of a fish like a sardine stuck on it.<note place='foot'>Lafcadio Hearn, <hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan</hi> (London, 1894), ii.
498 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer agrees with Mr.
Aston as to the formula of exorcism&mdash;<q><foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Oni
wa soto! fuku wa uchi</foreign></q>, <q>Devils
out! Good fortune in!</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of poverty
and
demons
in China,
India, and
Persia.</note>
On the third day of the tenth month in every year the
Hak-Ka, a native race in the province of Canton, sweep
their houses and turn the accumulated filth out of doors,
together with three sticks of incense and some mock money
made of paper. At the same time they call out, <q>Let the
devil of poverty depart! Let the devil of poverty depart!</q>
By performing this ceremony they hope to preserve their
homes from penury.<note place='foot'>Eitel, <q>Les Hak-ka,</q> <hi rend='italic'>L'Anthropologie</hi>,
iv. (1893) pp. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among some of the Hindoos of the
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
Punjaub on the morning after Diwali or the festival of
lamps, at which the souls of ancestors are believed to visit
the house, the oldest woman of the family takes a corn-sieve
or winnowing basket and a broom, to both of which magical
virtues are ascribed, and beats them in every corner of the
house, exclaiming, <q>God abide, and poverty depart!</q> The
sieve is then carried out of the village, generally to the east
or north, and being thrown away is supposed to bear away
with it the poverty and distress of the household. Or the
woman flings all the sweepings and rubbish out of doors,
saying, <q>Let all dirt and wretchedness depart from here,
and all good fortune come in.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. pp.
146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 792 (June, 1885); D. C. J.
Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of Panjab Ethnography</hi>
(Calcutta, 1883), p. 119; W.
Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folklore
of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 188, 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Persians used annually
to expel the demons or goblins (<foreign rend='italic'>Dives</foreign>) from their houses in
the month of December. For this purpose the Magi wrote
certain words with saffron on a piece of parchment or paper
and then held the writing over a fire into which they threw
cotton, garlic, grapes, wild rue, and the horn of an animal
that had been killed on the sixteenth of September. The
spell thus prepared was nailed or glued to the inside of the
door, and the door was painted red. Next the priest took
some sand and spread it out with a knife, while he muttered
certain prayers. After that he strewed the sand on the
floor, and the enchantment was complete. The demons now
immediately vanished, or at least were deprived of all their
malignant power.<note place='foot'>John Richardson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of
Persian, Arabic, and English</hi>, New
Edition (London, 1829), p. liii.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
in China at
the end of
the year.</note>
For ages it has been customary in China to expel the
demons from house and home, from towns and cities, at the
end of every year. Such general expulsions of devils go by
the name of <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>no</foreign>. They are often mentioned and described
in Chinese literature. For example, under the Han dynasty,
in the second century of our era, <q>it was ordered that <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>fang-siang
shi</foreign> with four eyes of gold, masked with bearskins, and
wearing black coats with red skirts, bearing lances and
brandishing shields, should always perform at the end of the
year in the twelfth month the <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>no</foreign> of the season, in the rear of
hundreds of official servants and boys, and search the interior
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
of the palace, in order to expel the demons of plague.
With bows of peach wood and arrows of the thorny jujube
they shoot at the spectres, and with porcelain drums they
drum at them; moreover they throw red balls and cereals at
them, in order to remove disease and calamity.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, vi. (Leyden, 1910)
pp. 977 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, in
a poem of the same period we read that <q>at the end of the
year the great <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>no</foreign> takes place for the purpose of driving off
all spectres. The <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>fang-siang</foreign> carry their spears, <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>wu</foreign> and <foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>hih</foreign>
hold their bundles of reed. Ten thousand lads with red
heads and black clothes, with bows of peach wood and
arrows of thorny jujube shoot at random all around.
Showers of potsherds and pebbles come down like rain,
infallibly killing strong spectres as well as the weak.
Flaming torches run after these beings, so that a sparkling
and streaming glare chases the red plague to all sides;
thereupon they destroy them in the imperial moats and
break down the suspension bridges (to prevent their
return).</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vi. 978.</note> At a later period Chinese historians inform
us that the house of Tsi caused the annual expulsion of
demons to be performed on the last day of the year by two
groups, each of one hundred and twenty lads, and twelve
animals headed by drums and wind instruments. The gates
of the wards and of the city walls were flung open, and the
emperor witnessed the ceremony seated on his throne in the
midst of his officers. With rolling drums the procession
entered the palace through the western gate, and passed
through all parts of it in two divisions, even ascending the
towers, while they hopped, jumped and shrieked; and on
quitting the palace they spread out in six directions till
they reached the city walls.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vi. 979.</note> At the present time it is
customary in every part of China to fire off crackers on
the last day and night of the year for the purpose of
terrifying and expelling the devils: enormous quantities
of the explosives are consumed at this season: the people
seem to vie with one another as to who shall let off
the most crackers and make the most noise. Sometimes
long strings of these fireworks hang from balconies and
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
eaves and keep up a continuous crackling for half an hour
together or more; in great cities the prolonged and ear-splitting
din is very annoying to foreigners. To the ears of
the Chinese the noise appears to be agreeable, if not for its
own sake, at least for the beneficial effect it is supposed
to produce by driving demons away. Indeed they seem to
be of opinion that any noise, provided it be sufficiently harsh
and loud, serves this useful purpose. The sound of brass
instruments is particularly terrifying to devils; hence the
great use which the Chinese make of gongs in rites of
exorcism. The clash of gongs, we are told, resounds through
the Chinese empire daily, especially in summer, when a
rise in the death-rate, which ignorant Europeans attribute
to mere climatic influences, stimulates the people to redouble
their efforts for the banishment of the fiends, who are the
real cause of all the mischief. At such times you may see
and hear groups of benevolent and public-spirited men and
women banging gongs, clashing cymbals, and drubbing
drums for hours together. No protest is made by their
neighbours, no complaint that they disturb the night's rest
of the sick and the tired. People listen with resignation or
rather with gratitude and complacency to the deafening
uproar raised by these generous philanthropists, who thus
devote their services gratuitously to the cause of the public
health.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, vi. 944 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Religion of China</hi> (New York,
1910), pp. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi>
(London, 1878), i. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Corea, also, the devils are driven out of the
towns on New Year's Eve by the firing of guns and the
popping of crackers.<note place='foot'>W. Woodville Rockhill, <q>Notes
on some of the Laws, Customs, and
Superstitions of Korea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The American
Anthropologist</hi>, iv. (1891) p. 185.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
in Tonquin.</note>
In Tonquin a <foreign rend='italic'>theckydaw</foreign> or general expulsion of malevolent
spirits commonly took place once a year, especially if there
was a great mortality amongst men, the elephants or horses
of the general's stable, or the cattle of the country, <q>the cause
of which they attribute to the malicious spirits of such men
as have been put to death for treason, rebellion, and conspiring
the death of the king, general, or princes, and that in
revenge of the punishment they have suffered, they are bent
to destroy everything and commit horrible violence. To
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
prevent which their superstition has suggested to them the
institution of this <foreign rend='italic'>theckydaw</foreign>, as a proper means to drive the
devil away, and purge the country of evil spirits.</q> The day
appointed for the ceremony was generally the twenty-fifth of
February, one month after the beginning of the new year,
which fell on the twenty-fifth of January. The intermediate
month was a season of feasting, merry-making of all kinds,
and general licence. During the whole month the great seal
was kept shut up in a box, face downwards, and the law was,
as it were, laid asleep. All courts of justice were closed;
debtors could not be seized; small crimes, such as petty
larceny, fighting, and assault, escaped with impunity; only
treason and murder were taken account of and the malefactors
detained till the great seal should come into operation
again. At the close of the saturnalia the wicked spirits
were driven away. Great masses of troops and artillery
having been drawn up with flying colours and all the pomp
of war, <q>the general beginneth then to offer meat offerings
to the criminal devils and malevolent spirits (for it is usual
and customary likewise amongst them to feast the condemned
before their execution), inviting them to eat and drink, when
presently he accuses them in a strange language, by
characters and figures, etc., of many offences and crimes
committed by them, as to their having disquieted the land,
killed his elephants and horses, etc., for all which they
justly deserve to be chastised and banished the country.
Whereupon three great guns are fired as the last signal;
upon which all the artillery and musquets are discharged,
that, by their most terrible noise the devils may be driven
away; and they are so blind as to believe for certain, that
they really and effectually put them to flight.</q><note place='foot'>S. Baron, <q>Description of the
Kingdom of Tonqueen,</q> in J. Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix. (London,
1811) pp. 673, 695 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; compare
Richard, <q>History of Tonquin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
p. 746. The account of the ceremony by
Tavernier (whom Baron criticises very
unfavourably) is somewhat different.
According to him, the expulsion of
wicked souls at the New Year is
combined with sacrifice to the honoured
dead. <q>At the beginning of every
year they have a great solemnity in
honour of the dead, who were in their
lives renowned for their noble actions
and valour, reckoning rebels among
them. They set up several altars,
some for sacrifices, others for the
names of the persons they design to
honour; and the king, princes, and
mandarins are present at them, and
make three profound reverences to the
altars when the sacrifices are finished;
but the king shoots five times against
the altars where the rebels' names are;
then the great guns are let off, and the
soldiers give vollies of small shot, to
put the souls to flight. The altars and
papers made use of at the sacrifices are
burnt, and the bonzes and sages go to
eat the meat made use of at the
sacrifice</q> (Tavernier, in John Harris's
<hi rend='italic'>Collection of Voyages and Travels</hi>,
vol. i. (London, 1744) p. 823). The
translation is somewhat abridged. For
the French original, see J. B. Tavernier,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages en Turquie, en Perse, et
aux Indes</hi> (The Hague, 1718), iii.
230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
in Cambodia and Siam.</note>
In Cambodia the expulsion of evil spirits took place in
March. Bits of broken statues and stones, considered as
the abode of the demons, were collected and brought to the
capital. Here as many elephants were collected as could be
got together. On the evening of the full moon volleys of
musketry were fired and the elephants charged furiously to
put the devils to flight. The ceremony was performed on
three successive days.<note place='foot'>É. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice sur le Cambodge</hi>
(Paris, 1875), p. 62.</note> In Siam the banishment of demons
is annually carried into effect on the last day of the old
year. A signal gun is fired from the palace; it is answered
from the next station, and so on from station to station,
till the firing has reached the outer gate of the city. Thus
the demons are driven out step by step. As soon as this
is done a consecrated rope is fastened round the circuit
of the city walls to prevent the banished demons from
returning. The rope is made of tough couch-grass and is
painted in alternate stripes of red, yellow, and blue.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. (Jena, 1867) pp. 237, 298,
314, 529 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mgr. Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Description
du Royaume Thai ou Siam</hi>
(Paris, 1854), i. 252. Bastian (p.
314), with whom Pallegoix seems
to agree, distinctly states that the
expulsion takes place on the last
day of the year. Yet both say
that it occurs in the fourth month
of the year. According to Pallegoix
(i. 253) the Siamese year is composed
of twelve lunar months, and the first
month usually begins in December.
Hence the expulsion of devils would
commonly take place in March, as in
Cambodia. In Laos the year begins
in the fifth month and it ends in the
fifth month of the following year. See
Lieutenant-Colonel Tournier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice
sur le Laos Français</hi> (Hanoi, 1900),
p. 187. According to Professor E.
Seler the festival of Toxcatl, celebrated
in the fifth month, was the old Mexican
festival of the New Year. See
E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>, ii.
(Berlin, 1899) pp. 153, 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen
aus dem königlichen
Museum für Völkerkunde</hi>, vi. Heft
2/4). Hence it appears that in some
calendars the year is not reckoned to
begin with the first month.</note>
According to a more recent account, the Siamese ceremony
takes place at the New Year holidays, which are three in
number, beginning with the first of April. For the feasting
which accompanies these holidays a special kind of cake
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
is made, <q>which is as much in demand as our own Shrove-Tuesday
pancakes or our Good-Friday hot cross-buns. The
temples are thronged with women and children making
offerings to Buddha and his priests. The people inaugurate
their New Year with numerous charitable and religious
deeds. The rich entertain the monks, who recite appropriate
prayers and chants. Every departed soul returns to the
bosom of his family during these three days, freed from any
fetters that may have bound him in the regions of indefinable
locality. On the third day the religious observances
terminate, and the remaining hours are devoted to <q>the
world, the flesh, and the devil.</q> Gambling is not confined
to the licensed houses, but may be indulged in anywhere.
Games of chance hold powerful sway in every house as long
as the licence to participate in them lasts. Priests in small
companies occupy posts at regular intervals round the city
wall, and spend their time in chanting away the evil spirits.
On the evening of the second day, the ghostly visitors from
the lower realms lose the luxury of being exorcised with
psalms. Every person who has a gun may fire it as often
as he pleases, and the noise thus made is undoubtedly fearful
enough in its intensity to cause any wandering traveller
from the far-off fiery land to retrace his steps with speed.
The bang and rattle of pistols, muskets, shot-guns, and rifles
cease not till the break of day, by which time the city is
effectually cleared of all its infernal visitors.</q><note place='foot'>Ernest Young, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</hi> (Westminster, 1898), pp.
135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> From this
account we learn that among the spirits thus banished are
the souls of the dead, who revisit their living friends once a
year. To the same effect, apparently, Bishop Bruguière,
writing from Bangkok in 1829, tells us that <q>the three first
days of the moon of April are days of solemn festivity for
the pious Siamese. That day Lucifer opens all the gates of
the abyss, the souls of the dead, which are shut up there,
come forth and partake of a repast in the bosom of their
family. They are treated splendidly. One of these three
days a monk repairs to the palace to preach before the
king. At the end of the sermon a preconcerted signal is
given, and in a moment the cannons are fired in all the
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
quarters of the city to chase the devil out of the walls or to
kill him, if he dares to resist. On the first day a temporary
king is named, who bears the title of <foreign rend='italic'>phaja-phollathep</foreign>;
during these three days he enjoys all the royal prerogatives,
the real king remaining shut up in his palace.</q><note place='foot'><q>Lettre de Mgr. Bruguière, évêque
de Capse, à M. Bousquet, vicaire-général
d'Aire,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annales de l'Association
de la Propagation de la Foi</hi>, v.
(Paris and Lyons, 1831) p. 188. As
to the temporary king of Siam, his
privileges and the ceremony of ploughing
which he performs, see <hi rend='italic'>The Dying
God</hi>, pp. 149-151.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
reception
and expulsion
of the
spirits of
the dead
in Japan.</note>
A similar belief and a similar custom prevail in Japan.
There, too, the souls of the departed return to their old
homes once a year, and a festival called the Feast of
Lanterns is made to welcome them. They come at evening
on the thirteenth day of the seventh month of the old
calendar, which falls towards the end of August. It is
needful to light them on their way. Accordingly bamboos
with pretty coloured lanterns attached to them are fastened
on the tombs, and being thickly set they make an illumination
on the hills, where the burying-grounds are generally
situated. Lamps of many hues or rows of tapers are also
lit and set out in front of the houses and in the gardens,
and small fires are kindled in the streets, so that the whole
city is in a blaze of light. After the sun has set, a great
multitude issues from the town, for every family goes forth
to meet its returning dead. When they come to the spot
where they believe the souls to be, they welcome the unseen
visitors and invite them to rest after their journey, and to
partake of refreshments which they offer to them. Having
allowed the souls time enough to satisfy their hunger and
recover from their fatigue, they escort them by torchlight,
chatting gaily with them, into the city and to the houses
where they lived and died. These are also illuminated with
brilliant lanterns; a banquet is spread on the tables; and
the places of the dead, who are supposed to absorb the
ethereal essence of the food, are laid for them as if they
were alive. After the repast the living go from house to
house to visit the souls of their dead friends and neighbours;
and thus they spend the night running about the town. On
the evening of the third day of the festival, which is the
fifteenth day of the month, the time has come for the souls
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
to return to their own place. Fires again blaze in the
streets to light them on the road; the people again escort
them ceremoniously to the spot where they met them two
days before; and in some places they send the lanterns
floating away on rivers or the sea in miniature boats, which
are laden with provisions for the spirits on their way to
their long home. But there is still a fear that some poor
souls may have lagged behind, or even concealed themselves
in a nook or corner, loth to part from the scenes of their
former life and from those they love. Accordingly steps
are taken to hunt out these laggards and send them packing
after their fellow-ghosts. With this intention the people
throw stones on the roofs of their houses in great profusion;
and going through every room armed with sticks they deal
swashing blows all about them in the empty air to chase
away the lingering souls. This they do, we are told, out of
a regard for their own comfort quite as much as from the
affection they bear to the dead; for they fear to be disturbed
by unseasonable apparitions if they suffered the airy
visitors to remain in the house.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire et description
generale du Japon</hi> (Paris, 1736), i.
128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; C. P. Thunberg, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages au
Japon</hi> (Paris, 1796), iv. 18-20; A.
Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>,
v. (Jena, 1869) p. 364; Beaufort, in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xv. (1886) p. 102; A. Morgan,
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of American Folk-lore</hi>, x.
(1897) pp. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Lafcadio Hearn,
<hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan</hi> (London,
1894), i. 106-110, ii. 504 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The custom of welcoming the souls of
the dead back to their old homes once
a year has been observed in many
lands. See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,
Second Edition, pp. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
reception
and expulsion
of the
spirits of
the dead
in ancient
Greece and Rome.</note>
Thus in spite of the kindly welcome given to the souls,
the fear which they inspire comes out plainly in the pains
taken to ensure their departure; and this fear justifies us in
including such forced departures among the ceremonies for
the expulsion of evils with which we are here concerned.
It may be remembered that the annual banishment of ghosts
has been practised by savages so low in the scale of humanity
as the Australian aborigines.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At the other end of the
scale it was observed in classical antiquity by the civilized
Greeks and Romans. The Athenians believed that at the
festival of the Anthesteria the souls of the dead came back
from the nether world and went about the city. Accordingly
ropes were fastened round the temples to keep out
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
the wandering ghosts; and with a like intention the people
chewed buckthorn in the morning and smeared the doors
of their houses with pitch, apparently thinking that any
rash spirits who might attempt to enter would stick fast
in the pitch and be glued, like so many flies, to the door.
But at the end of the festival the souls were bidden to
depart in these words: <q>Out of the door with you, souls.
The Anthesteria is over.</q><note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> μιαραὶ ἡμέραι; τοῦ
Ἀνθεστηριῶνος μηνός, ἐν αἶς τὰς ψυχὰς
τῶν κατοιχομένων ἀνιέναι ἐδόκουν.
Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> Θύραζε Κᾶρες;
οὐκέτ᾽ Ἀνθεστήρια ... τινὲς δὲ οὕτως
τὴν παροιμίαν φασί; Θύραζε Κῆρες οὐκέτ᾽
Ἀνθεστήρια; ὡς κατὰ τὴν πόλιν τοῖς
Ἀνθεστηρίοις τῶν ψυχῶν περιερχομένων.
<hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> μιαρὰ ἡμέρα; ἐν τοῖς Χουσὶν
Ἀνθεστηριῶνος μηνός, ἐν ᾧ δοκοῦσιν αἱ
ψυχαὶ τῶν τελευτησάντων ἀνιέναι, ῥάμνῳ
ἕωθεν ἐμασῶντο καὶ πίττῃ τὰς θύρας
ἔχριον. Pollux, viii. 141: περισχοινίσαι
τὰ ἱερὰ ἔλεγον ἐν ταῖς ἀποφράσι καί τὸ
παραφράξαι. As to the closing of the
temples, see further Athenaeus, x. 49,
p. 447 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>. As to the Anthesteria in
general, see E. Rohde, <hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Tübingen
and Leipsic, 1903), i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
who rightly adopts Hesychius's second
explanation of Κῆρες. The reasons
given by August Mommsen for rejecting
that explanation betray an imperfect
acquaintance with popular superstition
(<hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im
Altertum</hi>, Leipsic, 1898, p. 386, note
1). Compare Miss J. E. Harrison,
<hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion</hi>, Second Edition (Cambridge,
1908), pp. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The Greeks
thought that branches of buckthorn
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rhamnus</foreign>) fastened to doors or windows
kept out witches (Dioscorides, <hi rend='italic'>De
materia medica</hi>, i. 119). A similar
virtue was attributed to buckthorn or
hawthorn by the ancient Romans and
modern European peasants. See A.
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des Feuers
und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Güterslöh,
1886), pp. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Murr, <hi rend='italic'>Pflanzenwelt
in der griechischen Mythologie</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1890), pp. 104-106; <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>,
ii. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 191. According to Mr.
Murr, <hi rend='italic'>rhamnus</hi> is <hi rend='italic'>Lycium europaeum</hi>
L. I learn from Miss J. E. Harrison
that Sir Francis Darwin believes it to
be buckthorn (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rhamnus catharticus</foreign>).
In some parts of Bosnia, when peasant
women go to pay a visit in a house
where a death has occurred they put
a little hawthorn (<foreign rend='italic'>Weissdorn</foreign>) behind
their headcloth, and on returning from
the house they throw it away on the
street. They think that if the deceased
has turned into a vampyre, he will be
so occupied in picking up the hawthorn,
that he will not be able to
follow them to their homes. See F.
S. Krauss, <q>Vampyre im südslavischen
Volksglauben,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxi. (1892) p.
326. At childbirth also the Greeks
smeared pitch on their houses to keep
out the demons (εἰς ἀπέλασιν τῶν δαιμόνων)
who attack women at such
times (Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> ῥάμνος).
To this day the Bulgarians try to keep
wandering ghosts from their houses by
painting crosses with tar on the outside
of their doors, while on the inside
they hang a tangled skein composed of
countless broken threads. The ghost
cannot enter until he has counted all
the threads, and before he has done
the sum the cock crows and the poor
soul must return to the grave. See A.
Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Bulgaren</hi> (Leipsic, 1898),
p. 454. The Servians paint crosses
with tar on the doors of houses and
barns to keep out vampyres. See F.
S. Krauss, <q>Vampyre im südslavischen
Volksglauben,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxi. (1892) p.
326. In the Highlands of Scotland it
was believed that tar put on a door
kept witches away. See J. G. Campbell,
<hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and Second Sight in
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</hi>
(Glasgow, 1902), p. 13. The
Thompson Indians of British Columbia
used to bar their houses against ghosts
by means not unlike those adopted
by the Athenians at the Anthesteria.
When a death had happened, they
hung a string of deer-hoofs across the
inside of the house, and an old woman
often pulled at the string to make the
hoofs rattle. This kept the ghost out.
They also placed branches of juniper
at the door or burned them in the fire
for the same purpose. See James
Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians of
British Columbia</q> (April 1900), p.
332 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History</hi>). With
the Athenian use of ropes to keep
ghosts out of the temples at the
Anthesteria we may compare the
Siamese custom of roping demons out
of the city at the New Year (above,
p. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>). Ropes of rice-straw, which
are supposed to repel demoniacal and
evil influences, are hung by the Japanese
in front of shrines, and at the New
Year they hang them also before ordinary
houses. See W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi>
(London, 1905), pp. 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Some
of the Kayans of Borneo stretch ropes
round their houses to keep out demons
of disease; in order to do so more
effectually leaves of a certain plant or
tree are fastened to the rope. See
A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. (Leyden, 1904) p. 448.</note> Yet for the entertainment of
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
the unseen guests during their short stay earthenware pots
full of boiled food appear to have been everywhere prepared
throughout the city; but probably these were placed
in the street outside the houses, in order to give the ghosts
no excuse for entering and disturbing the inmates. No
priest would eat of the food thus offered to the dead,<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>,
218.</note> but
prowling beggars probably had no such scruples. Similarly
when the Sea Dyaks of Sarawak celebrate their great Festival
of Departed Spirits at intervals which vary from one to
three or four years, food is prepared for the dead and they
are summoned from their far-off home to partake of it;
but it is put outside at the entrance of the house. And
before the general arrival of the souls, while the people
are busy brewing the drink for the feast, each family takes
care to hang an earthenware pot full of the liquor outside
of the single room which it occupies in the large common
house, lest some thirsty soul should arrive prematurely from
the other world, and, forcing his way into the domestic
circle, should not merely slake his thirst but carry off one
of the living.<note place='foot'>J. Perham, <q>Sea Dyak Religion,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 14, December
1884, pp. 296-298.</note> During three days in May the Romans
held a festival in honour of the ghosts. The temples were
shut, doubtless to keep out the ghostly swarms; but, as in
Japan, every house seems to have been thrown open to
receive the spirits of its own departed. When the reception
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
was over, each head of a family arose at dead of night,
washed his hands, and having made with fingers and thumb
certain magic signs to ward off ghosts, he proceeded to
throw black beans over his shoulder without looking behind
him. As he did so, he said nine times, <q>With these beans
I redeem me and mine</q>; and the ghosts, following unseen
at his heels, picked up the beans and left him and his alone.
Then he dipped his hands again in water, clashed bronze
vessels together to make a din, and begged the ghosts to
depart from his house, saying nine times, <q>Go forth, paternal
shades!</q> After that he looked behind him, and the ceremony
was over: the ghosts had taken their leave for
another year.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, v. 419-486; Varro,
quoted by Nonius Marcellus, p. 135 (p.
142 ed. Quicherat), <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Lemures</q>;
Festus, p. 87 ed. C. O. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Fabam.</q> Ovid, who is our chief
authority for the ceremony, speaks as
if the festival lasted only one day (the
ninth of May). But we know from the
inscribed calendars that it lasted three
days. See W. Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>The
Roman Festivals of the period of the
Republic</hi> (London, 1899), pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of Satan
among the
Wotyaks and Cheremiss of
Russia.</note>
Annual expulsions of demons, witches, or evil influences
appear to have been common among the heathen of Europe,
if we may judge from the relics of such customs among their
descendants at the present day. Thus among the heathen
Wotyaks, a Finnish people of Eastern Russia, all the young
girls of the village assemble on the last day of the year
or on New Year's Day, armed with sticks, the ends of which
are split in nine places. With these they beat every corner
of the house and yard, saying, <q>We are driving Satan out of
the village.</q> Afterwards the sticks are thrown into the
river below the village, and as they float down stream Satan
goes with them to the next village, from which he must be
driven out in turn. In some villages the expulsion is
managed otherwise. The unmarried men receive from every
house in the village groats, flesh, and brandy. These they
take to the fields, light a fire under a fir-tree, boil the groats,
and eat of the food they have brought with them, after
pronouncing the words, <q>Go away into the wilderness, come
not into the house.</q> Then they return to the village and
enter every house where there are young women. They
take hold of the young women and throw them into the
snow, saying, <q>May the spirits of disease leave you.</q> The
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
remains of the groats and the other food are then distributed
among all the houses in proportion to the amount that each
contributed, and each family consumes its share. According
to a Wotyak of the Malmyz district the young men throw
into the snow whomever they find in the houses, and this is
called <q>driving out Satan</q>; moreover, some of the boiled
groats are cast into the fire with the words, <q>O god, afflict
us not with sickness and pestilence, give us not up as a prey
to the spirits of the wood.</q> But the most antique form of
the ceremony is that observed by the Wotyaks of the Kasan
Government. First of all a sacrifice is offered to the Devil
at noon. Then all the men assemble on horseback in the
centre of the village, and decide with which house they shall
begin. When this question, which often gives rise to hot
disputes, is settled, they tether their horses to the paling, and
arm themselves with whips, clubs of lime-wood, and bundles
of lighted twigs. The lighted twigs are believed to have the
greatest terrors for Satan. Thus armed, they proceed with
frightful cries to beat every corner of the house and yard,
then shut the door, and spit at the ejected fiend. So they
go from house to house, till the Devil has been driven from
every one. Then they mount their horses and ride out
of the village, yelling wildly and brandishing their clubs
in every direction. Outside of the village they fling away
the clubs and spit once more at the Devil.<note place='foot'>Max Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wotjäken</hi> (Stuttgart,
1882), pp. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Cheremiss,
another Finnish people of Eastern Russia, chase Satan from
their dwellings by beating the walls with cudgels of lime-wood.
For the same purpose they fire guns, stab the
ground with knives, and insert burning chips of wood in the
crevices. Also they leap over bonfires, shaking out their
garments as they do so; and in some districts they blow
on long trumpets of lime-tree bark to frighten him away.
When he has fled to the wood, they pelt the trees with
some of the cheese-cakes and eggs which furnished the
feast.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der
Geschichte</hi> (Leipsic, 1860), ii. 94; P. v.
Stenin, <q>Ein neuer Beitrag zur Ethnographie
der Tscheremissen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lviii. (1890) p. 204.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of witches
and other
powers of
evil in
Christian
Europe.</note>
In Christian Europe the old heathen custom of expelling
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
the powers of evil at certain times of the year has survived
to modern times. Thus in some villages of Calabria the
month of March is inaugurated with the expulsion of the
witches. It takes place at night to the sound of the church
bells, the people running about the streets and crying,
<q>March is come.</q> They say that the witches roam about
in March, and the ceremony is repeated every Friday evening
during the month.<note place='foot'>Vincenzo Dorsa, <hi rend='italic'>La tradizione
greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze
popolari della Calabria Citeriore</hi> (Cosenza,
1884), pp. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Often, as might have been anticipated,
the ancient pagan rite has attached itself to church festivals.
For example, in Calabria at Eastertide every family provides
itself in time with a supply of holy water, and when the
church bells proclaim the resurrection of Christ the people
sprinkle the house with the water, saying in a loud voice,
<q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Esciti fora sùrici uorvi, esciti fora tentaziuni, esca u malu
ed entri u bene</foreign>.</q> At the same time they knock on doors and
windows, on chests and other articles of furniture.<note place='foot'>Vincenzo Dorsa, <hi rend='italic'>La tradizione
greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze
popolari della Calabria Citeriore</hi>, p. 48.</note> Again,
in Albania on Easter Eve the young people light torches
of resinous wood and march in procession, swinging them,
through the village. At last they throw the torches into the
river, crying, <q>Ha, Kore! we throw you into the river, like
these torches, that you may never return.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische
Studien</hi> (Jena, 1854), i. 160. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Silesian peasants
believe that on Good Friday the witches go their rounds and
have great power for mischief. Hence about Oels, near
Strehlitz, the people on that day arm themselves with old
brooms and drive the witches from house and home, from
farmyard and cattle-stall, making a great uproar and clatter
as they do so.<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
i. 86.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Widespread
fear
of witches
and wizards
in Europe.</note>
The belief in the maleficent power and activity of
witches and wizards would seem to have weighed almost
as heavily on the heathen of Central and Northern Europe in
prehistoric times as it still weighs on the minds of African
negroes and other savages in many parts of the world.
But while these unhallowed beings were always with our
forefathers, there were times and seasons of the year when
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
they were supposed to be particularly mischievous, and
when accordingly special precautions had to be taken against
them. Among such times were the twelve days from
Christmas to Twelfth Night, the Eve of St. George, the
Eve of May Day (Walpurgis Night), and Midsummer
Eve.<note place='foot'>As to the activity of the evil powers
on the twelve days from Christmas to
Twelfth Night, see Gustav Bilfinger,
<hi rend='italic'>Das germanische Julfest</hi> (Stuttgart,
1901), pp. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; as to witches on
St. George's Eve, May Eve, and Midsummer
Eve, see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and
the Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
127, 334 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of witches
on Walpurgis
Night (the
Eve of
May Day),
on May
Day in the
Tyrol.</note>
In Central Europe it was apparently on Walpurgis Night,
the Eve of May Day, above all other times that the baleful
powers of the witches were exerted to the fullest extent;
nothing therefore could be more natural than that men
should be on their guard against them at that season, and
that, not content with merely standing on their defence, they
should boldly have sought to carry the war into the enemy's
quarters by attacking and forcibly expelling the uncanny
crew. Amongst the weapons with which they fought their
invisible adversaries in these grim encounters were holy
water, the fumes of incense or other combustibles, and loud
noises of all kinds, particularly the clashing of metal instruments,
amongst which the ringing of church bells was perhaps
the most effectual.<note place='foot'>G. Bilfinger, <hi rend='italic'>Das germanische
Julfest</hi> (Stuttgart, 1901), p. 76.</note> Some of these strong measures
are still in use among the peasantry, or were so down
to recent years, and there seems no reason to suppose
that their magical virtue has been at all impaired by
lapse of time. In the Tyrol, as in other places, the expulsion
of the powers of evil at this season goes by the
name of <q>Burning out the Witches.</q> It takes place on May
Day, but people have been busy with their preparations
for days before. On a Thursday at midnight bundles are
made up of resinous splinters, black and red spotted hemlock,
caperspurge, rosemary, and twigs of the sloe. These are
kept and burned on May Day by men who must first
have received plenary absolution from the Church. On the
last three days of April all the houses are cleansed and
fumigated with juniper berries and rue. On May Day,
when the evening bell has rung and the twilight is falling,
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
the ceremony of <q>Burning out the Witches</q> begins. Men
and boys make a racket with whips, bells, pots, and pans;
the women carry censers; the dogs are unchained and run
barking and yelping about. As soon as the church bells
begin to ring, the bundles of twigs, fastened on poles, are
set on fire and the incense is ignited. Then all the house-bells
and dinner-bells are rung, pots and pans are clashed,
dogs bark, every one must make a noise. And amid this
hubbub all scream at the pitch of their voices,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Witch flee, flee from here,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Or it will go ill with thee.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then they run seven times round the houses, the yards, and
the village. So the witches are smoked out of their lurking-places
and driven away.<note place='foot'>J. M. Ritter von Alpenburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</hi> (Zurich,
1857), pp. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J. E. Waldfreund,
<q>Volksgebräuche und Aberglauben,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iii. (1855)
p. 339. A Westphalian form of the
expulsion of evil is the driving out the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Süntevögel</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sunnenvögel</foreign>, or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sommervögel</foreign>,
that is, the butterfly. On St.
Peter's Day, 22nd February, children
go from house to house knocking on
them with hammers and singing
doggerel rhymes in which they bid the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sommervögel</foreign> to depart. Presents are
given to them at every house. Or the
people of the house themselves go
through all the rooms, knocking on all
the doors, to drive away the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sunnenvögel</foreign>.
If this ceremony is omitted, it
is thought that various misfortunes
will be the consequence. The house
will swarm with rats, mice, and other
vermin, the cattle will be sick, the
butterflies will multiply at the milk-bowls,
etc. See J. F. L. Woeste,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft
Mark</hi> (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 24; J. W.
Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
i. (Göttingen and Leipsic, 1852) p. 87;
A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Westfälische Sagen, Gebräuche
und Märchen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859),
ii. pp. 119-121, §§ 366-374; Montanus,
<hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche,
und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; U. Jahn,
<hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche bei
Ackerbau und Viehzucht</hi> (Breslau,
1884), pp. 94-96.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of witches
on Walpurgis
Night in
Bavaria and
Voigtland.</note>
The custom of expelling the witches on Walpurgis Night
is still, or was down to thirty or forty years ago, observed
in many parts of Bavaria and among the Germans of
Bohemia. Thus in the Böhmerwald Mountains, which divide
Bavaria from Bohemia, all the young fellows of the village
assemble after sunset on some height, especially at a cross-road,
and crack whips for a while in unison with all their
strength. This drives away the witches; for so far as the
sound of the whips is heard, these maleficent beings can
do no harm. The peasants believe firmly in the efficacy of
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
this remedy. A yokel will tell his sons to be sure to crack
their whips loudly and hit the witches hard; and to give
more sting to every blow the whip-lashes are knotted. On
returning to the village the lads often sing songs and collect
contributions of eggs, lard, bread, and butter. In some
places, while the young fellows are cracking their whips, the
herdsmen wind their horns, and the long-drawn notes, heard
far-off in the silence of night, are very effectual for banning
the witches. In other places, again, the youth blow upon
so-called shawms made of peeled willow-wood in front of
every house, especially in front of such houses as are
suspected of harbouring a witch.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi> (Munich, 1860-1866),
ii. 272, iii. 302 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 934; O.
Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic, 1863), p.
137.</note> In Voigtland, a bleak
mountainous region of Central Germany<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Britannica</hi>, Ninth
Edition, xx. 493.</note> bordering on the
Frankenwald Mountains, the belief in witchcraft is still
widely spread. The time when the witches are particularly
dreaded is Walpurgis Night, but they play their pranks
also on Midsummer Eve, St. Thomas's Eve, and Christmas
Eve. On these days they try to make their way into a
neighbour's house and to borrow or steal something from
it; and woe betide the man in whose house they have
succeeded in their nefarious errand! It is on Walpurgis
Night and Midsummer Eve that they ride through the air
astride of pitchforks and churn-dashers. They also bewitch
the cattle; so to protect the poor beasts from their
hellish machinations the people on these days chalk up
three crosses on the doors of the cattle-stalls or hang up St.
John's wort, marjoram, and so forth. Very often, too, the
village youth turn out in a body and drive the witches away
with the cracking of whips, the firing of guns, and the
waving of burning besoms through the air, not to mention
shouts and noises of all sorts.<note place='foot'>R. Eisel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</hi>
(Gera, 1871), p. 210.</note> Such customs appear
to be observed generally in Thüringen, of which Voigtland
is a part. The people think that the blows of the
whip actually fall on the witches hovering unseen in the
air, and that so far as the cracking of the whips is heard,
the crops will be good and nothing will be struck by
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
lightning,<note place='foot'>August Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Sagen
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), pp. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> no doubt because the witches have been banished
by the sound.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
<q>Burning
of the
Witches</q>
on Walpurgis
Night in
Bohemia.</note>
In Bohemia many are the precautions taken by the
peasantry, both German and Czech, to guard themselves
and their cattle against the witches on Walpurgis Night.
Thorny branches are laid on the thresholds of cow-houses
and dwellings to keep out the infernal crew, and after sunset
boys armed with whips and guns drive them from the
villages with a prodigious uproar and burn them in bonfires
on the neighbouring heights. It is true that the witches
themselves are not seen, though effigies of them are sometimes
consumed in the bonfires. This <q>Burning of the
Witches,</q> as it is called, protects the crops from their
ravages. German lads also employ goats' horns as a means
of driving away the witches at the moment when they issue
forth from kitchen-chimneys on their way to the witches'
Sabbath.<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>
(Prague, preface dated 1861), pp. 210-212;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic,
1863), p. 137; Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte,
Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen
Westböhmen</hi> (Prague, 1905), pp. 70-73.</note> Some minor variations in the mode of expelling
the witches on Walpurgis Night have been noted in
the German villages of Western Bohemia. Thus in Absrot
the village youth go out to cross-roads and there beat
the ground with boards, no doubt for the purpose of thrashing
the witches who are commonly supposed to assemble
at such spots. In Deslawen, after the evening bells have
rung, people go through the houses beating the walls or
floors with boards; then they issue forth into the roads,
headed by a boy who carries the effigy of a witch made up
of rags. Thereupon grown-up folk crack whips and fire
shots. In Schönwert the young people go in bands through
the village and the meadows, making a great noise with
bells, flutes, and whips, for the more noise they make the
more effectual is the ceremony supposed to be. Meantime
the older men are busy firing shots over the fields
and the dungheaps. In Hochofen troops of children go
from house to house on Walpurgis Evening, making a
great clatter with tin cans and kettles, while they scream,
<q>Witch, go out, your house is burning.</q> This is called
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
<q>Driving out the Witches.</q><note place='foot'>Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 71.</note> The German peasants of
Moravia, also, universally believe that on Walpurgis Night
the witches ride through the air on broomsticks and pitchforks
in order to revel with Satan, their master, at the old
heathen places of sacrifice, which are commonly on heights.
To guard the cattle and horses from their insidious attacks
it is usual to put knives under the thresholds and to stick
sprigs of birch in the dungheaps. Formerly lads used to
gather on the heights where the witches were believed to
assemble; and by hurling besoms, dipped in pitch and
ignited, they attempted to banish the invisible foe.<note place='foot'>Willibald Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>
(Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 324.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
<q>Burning
of the
Witches</q>
on Walpurgis
Night in
Silesia.</note>
In Silesia also, we are told, the belief in witchcraft still
occupies a large space in the minds of the people. It is
on Walpurgis Night that the witches are let loose and all
the powers of magic have full sway. At that time the
cottagers not uncommonly see a witch astride a hayfork
or broomstick emerging from the chimney. Hence people
are careful to remove all utensils from the fireplace, or the
witches would ride on them, when they go with the Evil
One to a cross-road or a gallows-hill, there to dance wild
dances in a circle on the snow or to cut capers on the corn-fields.
Steps are taken to guard village, house, and farmyard
against their incursions. Three crosses are chalked
up on every door, and little birch-trees fastened over the
house-door, because the witches must count every leaf on
the tree before they can cross the threshold, and while they
are still counting, the day breaks and their power is gone.
On that evening the cattle are especially exposed to the
attacks of the witches, and prudent farmers resort to
many expedients for the sake of protecting the animals from
the wiles of these malignant beings. No wise man would
sell milk or butter on Walpurgis Night; if he did, his
cows would certainly be bewitched. And all the work of the
byres should be finished and the cattle fed before sundown,
which is the time when the witches begin to swarm in the
air. Besides the usual crosses chalked on the door of the
byre, it is customary to fasten over it three horse-shoes, or a
holed flint, or a goat's horns with four branches; it is well,
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
too, to nail bits of buckthorn crosswise over every entrance,
and to lean pitchforks and harrows against the doors with
the sharp points turned outwards. A sod freshly cut from
a meadow and sprinkled with marsh-marigolds has likewise
a very good effect when it is placed before a threshold.
Moreover in the Grünberg district young men go clanking
chains through the village and farmyards, for iron scares
the witches; also they knock at the doors and they prance
through the yards astride on pitchforks and broomsticks, all
to drive away the witches, but in doing so they must be sure
not to speak a word. A very powerful means of keeping
witches at bay are the Walpurgis bonfires, which are still
kindled in the Hoyerswerda district and the Iser Mountains.
The fires are fed with the stumps of old brooms, and the
people dance round them and wave burning besoms, just as
they do at the Midsummer bonfires. About Hoyerswerda
they call these fires, as usual, <q>Burning the Witches.</q><note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic,
1903-1906), i. 108-110. With regard
to the dance of the witches in the
snow, it is a common saying in the
northern district of the Harz Mountains
that the witches must dance the
snow away on the top of the Blocksberg
on the first of May. See A.
Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic,
1848), p. 376. At Dabelow in
Mecklenburg all utensils are removed
from the fireplace on Walpurgis Night,
lest the witches should ride on them to
the Blocksberg. See A. Kuhn and
W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
<q>Burning
of the
Witches</q>
on Walpurgis
Night
among the
Wends of
Saxony.</note>
The Wends of Saxony adopt very similar precautions
against witches on the evening of Walpurgis Day. Any one
who has been in Lusatia on the last day of April must
remember the fires which he saw blazing on the mountains
and in the valleys and the plains. That is the Witch-burning
(<foreign rend='italic'>kuzlarniče palić</foreign>). For weeks before that the boys
and lads have been collecting old brooms, and when the
time comes they sally forth and dance with the burning
besoms on the fields; the fire is thought to ban the witches
and foul fiends. Also on that day people march about the
fields and meadows clinking stones on scythes; for the noise
is also deemed effectual in driving the witches away.<note place='foot'>R. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Sächsische Volkskunde</hi>
(Dresden, 1901), p. 359.</note> At
Penzance in Cornwall boys run about blowing horns on the
thirtieth of April (Walpurgis Day), and when questioned why
they do so they say that they are <q>scaring away the devil.</q>
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
The horns used for this purpose are made of tin and shaped
like a herald's trumpet; they vary in length from a foot to
a yard and can give forth a very loud blast.<note place='foot'>Lady Agnes Macdonell, in <hi rend='italic'>The
Times</hi>, May 3rd, 1913, p. 6. In a
letter to me (dated 31, Kensington Park
Gardens, May 5th [1913]) Lady Macdonell
was kind enough to give me
some further particulars as to the custom.
It seems that the boys use their
horns on May Day as well as on the
thirtieth of April. Processions of boys
and girls decorated with flowers and
leaves, and carrying flags and horns,
went about Penzance on May Day of
the present year (1913). The horns
are straight; some of them terminate
in a bell-shaped opening, others have
no such appendage. The latter and
plainer are the older pattern.</note> The custom
is probably a relic of a general expulsion of witches and
demons on that day.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of witches
during the
Twelve
Days from
Christmas
to Epiphany. <q>Burning
out the
Old Year</q>
at Biggar.</note>
Another witching time is the period of twelve days
between Christmas (the twenty-fifth of December) and
Epiphany (the sixth of January). A thousand quaint
superstitions cluster round that mystic season. It is then
that the Wild Huntsman sweeps through the air, the powers
of evil are let loose, werewolves are prowling round, and
the witches work their wicked will. Hence in some parts of
Silesia the people burn pine-resin all night long between
Christmas and the New Year in order that the pungent
smoke may drive witches and evil spirits far away from
house and homestead; and on Christmas Eve and New
Year's Eve they fire shots over fields and meadows, into
shrubs and trees, and wrap straw round the fruit-trees, to
prevent the spirits from doing them harm.<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
i. 15-18. With regard to the
superstitions attached to these twelve
days or twelve nights, as the Germans
call them, see further A. Kuhn und
W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen,
Märchen und Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic,
1848), pp. 408-418; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen,
Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</hi>
(Leipsic, 1859), ii. 111-117; L. Strackerjan,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem
Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi> (Oldenburg,
1867), ii. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. Toeppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Danzig, 1867),
pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1869), pp. 61
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, § 74; E. Mogk, <q>Mythologie,</q> in
H. Paul's <hi rend='italic'>Grundriss der germanischen
Philologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> iii. (Strasburg, 1900) pp.
260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch
und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On New
Year's Eve, which is Saint Sylvester's Day, Bohemian lads,
armed with guns, form themselves into circles and fire
thrice into the air. This is called <q>Shooting the Witches</q>
and is supposed to frighten the witches away. While the
young fellows are rendering this service to the community,
the housewives go about their houses sprinkling holy water
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
in all the rooms and chalking three crosses on every door,<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi> (Prague,
preface dated 1861), p. 602.</note>
no doubt to accelerate the departure of the witches, and to
prevent their return. At Trieste on St. Sylvester's Eve
people form processions and drive the evil spirits with sticks
and brooms out of the houses, while they invite the good
spirits and good luck to come and dwell there.<note place='foot'>W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (London,
1905), p. 312, referring to Lady
Burton's life of her husband.</note> In the
town of Biggar, in Lanarkshire, it has been customary from
time immemorial to celebrate a custom called <q>burning out
the Old Year</q> on the thirty-first of December. A large
bonfire, to which all the onlookers think it their duty to
contribute fuel, is kindled in the evening at the town cross,
and fires are also lighted on the adjacent hills.<note place='foot'>T. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular
Customs</hi> (London, 1876), p. 506.</note> When we
remember how common it is in Central Europe to kindle
fires at critical seasons for the purpose of burning the
witches, we may suspect that what the good people of
Biggar originally intended to burn on the last night of the
year was not the Old Year but the witches. It would have
been well for Scotland and for Europe if the practice of
burning witches had always been carried out in this harmless
fashion. A visitor to Scotland in 1644 saw nine
witches of flesh and blood burned at one time on Leith
Links.<note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>The Darker Superstitions
of Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh, 1834),
p. 670.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of witches
and
demons in
Switzerland
and
France.</note>
The last of the mystic twelve days is Epiphany or
Twelfth Night, and it has been selected as a proper season
for the expulsion of the powers of evil in various parts of
Europe. Thus at Brunnen on the Lake of Lucerne the boys
go about in procession on Twelfth Night, carrying torches
and lanterns, and making a great noise with horns, cow-bells,
whips, and so forth. This is said to frighten away
the two female spirits of the wood, Strudeli and Strätteli.
Of these two names Strudeli seems to mean <q>witch</q> and
Strätteli <q>nightmare.</q> The people believe that if they do
not make enough noise, there will be little fruit that year.<note place='foot'>H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N.F., xxx. (1875)
p. 198; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv.
(Leipzic and Berlin, 1913), p. 109;
E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <hi rend='italic'>Feste und
Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</hi> (Zurich,
1913), p. 101.</note>
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
On the same day the inhabitants of the Muota Valley, immediately
to the east of Brunnen, used to make a similar racket,
no doubt for a similar purpose. They collected chains, pots
and pans, cow-bells, horns, and such like musical instruments.
He who could borrow a number of horse's bells and wear them
on his person so that the jangling sounded afar off was
deemed uncommonly lucky. Thus equipped parties of people
marched about making all the din they could; sometimes
they would meet and joining all their efforts in one
concerted burst of harmony or discord would raise such
a hubbub that the surrounding rocks rang again with
the sound.<note place='foot'>H. Herzog, <hi rend='italic'>Schweizerische Volksfeste,
Sitten und Gebräuche</hi> (Aaran,
1884), pp. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Labruguière, also, a canton of Southern
France, the evil spirits are expelled at the same season.
The canton lies in the picturesque and little-known region
of the Black Mountains, which form a sort of link between
the Pyrenees and the Cevennes, and have preserved in their
remote recesses certain types of life which have long disappeared
elsewhere. On the eve of Twelfth Day the
inhabitants rush through the streets jangling bells, clattering
kettles, and doing everything to make a discordant noise.
Then by the light of torches and blazing faggots they set
up a prodigious hue and cry, an ear-splitting uproar, hoping
thereby to chase all the wandering ghosts and devils from
the town.<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes,
et Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 81, 85.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Befana in
the Piazza
Navona at
Rome,
in the
Tuscan
Romagna.</note>
With this noisy ceremony we may compare a similar
custom which is still observed year by year at the same
season in the long and spacious Piazza Navona at Rome.
There on the night before Epiphany a dense crowd assembles,
and diverts itself by raising a hideous uproar. Soon after
supper troops of young folk and others march through the
streets, preceded by puppets or pasteboard figures and all
making the utmost possible din. They converge from
different quarters on the Piazza Navona, there to unite in
one prolonged and deafening outburst of clangorous discord.
The favourite musical instruments employed in this cats'
concert are penny trumpets, of which, together with tambourines,
bells, and so forth, the shops take care to provide
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
a large stock as a preparation for the pandemonium of the
evening. The ceremony is supposed to be in honour of a
certain mythical old hag called Befana, effigies of whom,
made of rags, are put by women and children in the windows
on Twelfth Night. Her name Befana is clearly a popular
corruption of Epiphany, the ecclesiastical name of the
festival; but viewed in connexion with the popular celebrations
which we have examined she may be suspected to be
of heathen rather than Christian origin. In fact we may
conjecture that she was of old a witch, and that the noisy
rite in the Piazza Navona is nothing but a relic of an annual
expulsion of witches at this season.<note place='foot'>As to Befana and her connexion
with Epiphany, see J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 234. The personified
Befana, an ugly but good-natured old
woman, is known in Sicily as well as
Italy. See G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Spettacoli e Feste
Popolari Siciliane</hi> (Palermo, 1881), p.
167. As to the ceremony in the Piazza
Navona, see H. Usener, <q>Italische
Mythen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv. (Leipsic
and Berlin, 1913) pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, who
rightly compares it to the Swiss ceremonies
observed at and near Brunnen
on Twelfth Night. I witnessed the
noisy scene in the Piazza Navona in
January, 1901.</note> A ceremony of the
same sort is annually observed on the same evening, the Eve
of Epiphany, by the peasantry who inhabit the mountains
of the Tuscan Romagna. A troop of lads parade the streets
of the village making a fiendish noise by means of bells and
kitchen utensils of tin and brass, while others blow blasts on
horns and reed-pipes. They drag about a cart containing
an effigy of an old woman made up of rags and tow, which
represents Befana (Epiphany). When they come to the
village square they put fire to the effigy, which soon vanishes
in smoke and flames amid a chorus of cries, shrieks, and other
forms of rustic melody.<note place='foot'>P. Fabbri, <q>Canti popolari raccolti
sui monti della Romagna-Toscana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradizioni
Popolari</hi>, xxii. (1903) pp. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. Usener, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv. 108
note 62. In the Abruzzi, on the evening
before Epiphany, musicians go from
house to house serenading the inmates
with songs and the strains of fiddles,
guitars, organs, and so forth. They are
accompanied by others carrying lanterns,
torches, or burning branches of juniper.
See Antonio de Nino, <hi rend='italic'>Usi e Costumi
Abruzzesi</hi> (Florence, 1879-1883), ii.
178-180; G. Finamore, <hi rend='italic'>Credenze, Usi
e Costumi Abruzzesi</hi> (Palermo, 1890),
pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Such house to house visitations
may be a relic of an old expulsion
of witches and demons.</note> Similar ceremonies are probably
observed on the same evening in other parts of Italy.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Expulsion
of the
Trows in
Shetland
on Up-helly-a',
the twenty-fourth
day
after
Christmas.</note>
In the Shetland Islands the Yule or Christmas holidays
begin, or used to begin, seven days before Christmas and last
till Antinmas, that is, the twenty-fourth day after Christmas.
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
In the Shetland parlance these holidays are known as <q>the
Yules.</q> On the first night, called Tul-ya's e'en, seven days
before Christmas, certain mischievous elves, whom the
Shetlanders name Trows, <q>received permission to leave their
homes in the heart of the earth and dwell, if it so pleased
them, above ground. There seemed to have been no doubt
that those creatures preferred disporting themselves among
the dwellings of men to residing in their own subterranean
abodes, for they availed themselves of every permission
given, and created no little disturbance among the mortals
whom they visited. One of the most important of all Yule-tide
observances was the <q>saining</q> required to guard life or
property from the Trows. If the proper observances were
omitted, the <q>grey-folk</q> were sure to take advantage of the
opportunity.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Biot Edmondston and Jessie
M. E. Saxby, <hi rend='italic'>The Home of a Naturalist</hi>
(London, 1888), p. 136. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore</hi>, vol. iii. <hi rend='italic'>Orkney and
Shetland Islands</hi>, collected by G. F.
Black (London, 1903), p. 196. As to
the Trows, whose name is doubtless
identical with the Norse Trolls (Swedish
<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>troll</foreign>, Norwegian <foreign lang='no' rend='italic'>trold</foreign>), see Edmondston
and Saxby, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 189 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
John Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Etymological Dictionary
of the Scottish Language</hi>, New Edition,
edited by J. Longmuir and D. Donaldson
(Paisley, 1879-1882), iv. 630 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
who observes that <q>while the Fairies
are uniformly represented as social,
cheerful, and benevolent beings, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Trows</foreign> are described as gloomy and
malignant, ever prone to injure men.</q></note> On the last day of the holidays, the twenty-fourth
day after Christmas, which in Shetland goes by the
name of Up-helly-a', Uphellia, or Uphaliday, <q>the doors
were all opened, and a great deal of pantomimic chasing
and driving and dispersing of unseen creatures took place.
Many pious ejaculations were uttered, and iron was
ostentatiously displayed, <q>for Trows can never abide the
sight o' iron.</q> The Bible was read and quoted. People
moved about in groups or couples, never singly, and infants
were carefully guarded as well as sained by vigilant and
learned <q>wise women.</q> Alas, the poor Trows! their time of
frolic and liberty was ended, and on Twenty-fourth night
they retired to their gloomy abodes beneath the sod, seldom
finding opportunity to reappear again, and never with the
same licence, until the Yules returned. All that pantomime,
all that invoking of holier Powers, were but methods of
<q>speeding the parting guest,</q> and mortals were rejoicing that
the unbidden, unwelcome grey-folk must depart. When day
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
dawned after Twenty-fourth night the Trows had vanished
and the Yules were ended.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Biot Edmondston and Jessie
M. E. Saxby, <hi rend='italic'>The Home of a Naturalist</hi>
(London, 1888), p. 146. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore</hi>, vol. iii. <hi rend='italic'>Orkney and
Shetland Islands</hi>, collected by G. F.
Black (London, 1903), pp. 202 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Of late years Up-helly-a' has
been celebrated in Lerwick with pompous and elaborate
masquerades. The chief event of the evening is a torch-light
procession of maskers or <q>guizers,</q> as they are called,
who escort the model of a Norse galley through the streets,
and finally set it on fire by throwing their torches into it.
But in this form the celebration seems to date only from the
latter part of the nineteenth century; in former times an old
boat filled with tar and ignited was dragged about and
blazing tar-barrels were drawn or kicked through the streets.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>The Shetland News</hi>, February 1st,
1913, p. 5. As January 5th is reckoned
Christmas in Shetland, the celebration
of Up-helly-a' falls on January 29th.
See J. Nicolson, in <hi rend='italic'>The World's Work
and Play</hi>, February, 1906, pp. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
For further information relating to the
ceremony I am indebted to the kindness
of Sheriff-Substitute David J.
Mackenzie (formerly of Lerwick, now
of Kilmarnock). According to one of
his correspondents, the Rev. Dr. J.
Willcock of Lerwick, the present
elaborate form of the ceremony dates
only from 1882, when the Duke of
Edinburgh visited Lerwick on naval
business, and Up-helly-a' was celebrated
in his honour on a grander scale than
ever before. Yet Dr. Willcock apparently
does not deny the antiquity
of the festival in a simpler form, for in
his letter he says: <q>In former times
an old boat filled with tar was set on
fire and dragged about, as were also
lighted tar-barrels.</q> Another authority
on Shetland antiquities, Mr. Gilbert
Goudie, writes to Sheriff Mackenzie
that <q>the kicking about and burning
a tar-barrel is very old in Lerwick.</q>
Compare <hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Orkney
and Shetland Islands</hi>, collected by G.
F. Black (London, 1903), p. 205:
<q>Formerly, blazing tar-barrels were
dragged about the town, and afterwards,
with the first break of morning,
dashed over the knab into the sea.</q>
Up-helly-a', the Shetland name for
Antinmas, is no doubt the same with
Uphalyday, which Dr. J. Jamieson
(<hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Scottish Language</hi>,
New Edition, iv. 676) defines as <q>the
first day after the termination of the
Christmas holidays,</q> quoting two
official documents of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1494 and
1541 respectively.
</p>
<p>
I have to thank my friend Miss
Anderson of Barskimming, Mauchline,
Ayrshire, for kindly calling my attention
to this interesting relic of the past.</p></note>
The fire, however procured, was probably in origin intended
to chase away the lingering Trows from the town at the end
of the holidays.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of witches
and
demons in
Europe.</note>
Thus it would seem that the custom of annually banishing
witches and demons on a day or night set apart for
the purpose has not been confined to Central Europe, but
can be traced from Calabria and Rome in the south to the
Shetland Islands in the far north.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Public Scapegoats.</head>


<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Expulsion of Embodied Evils.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Expulsion of Embodied Evils.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The expulsion
of
embodied
evils.</note>
Thus far we have dealt with that class of the general
expulsion of evils which I have called direct or immediate.
In this class the evils are invisible, at least to common eyes,
and the mode of deliverance consists for the most part in
beating the empty air and raising such a hubbub as may
scare the mischievous spirits and put them to flight. It
remains to illustrate the second class of expulsions, in which
the evil influences are embodied in a visible form or are
at least supposed to be loaded upon a material medium,
which acts as a vehicle to draw them off from the people,
village, or town.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Expulsion
of demons
personified
by men
among the
American
Indians. Expulsion
of a demon
embodied
in an image
among the
Mayas of
Yucatan.</note>
The Pomos of California celebrate an expulsion of devils
every seven years, at which the devils are represented by disguised
men. <q>Twenty or thirty men array themselves in
harlequin rig and barbaric paint, and put vessels of pitch on
their heads; then they secretly go out into the surrounding
mountains. These are to personify the devils. A herald goes
up to the top of the assembly-house, and makes a speech to
the multitude. At a signal agreed upon in the evening the
masqueraders come in from the mountains, with the vessels of
pitch flaming on their heads, and with all the frightful accessories
of noise, motion, and costume which the savage mind can
devise in representation of demons. The terrified women and
children flee for life, the men huddle them inside a circle, and,
on the principle of fighting the devil with fire, they swing
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
blazing firebrands in the air, yell, whoop, and make frantic
dashes at the marauding and bloodthirsty devils, so creating
a terrific spectacle, and striking great fear into the hearts of
the assembled hundreds of women, who are screaming and
fainting and clinging to their valorous protectors. Finally
the devils succeed in getting into the assembly-house, and
the bravest of the men enter and hold a parley with them.
As a conclusion of the whole farce, the men summon
courage, the devils are expelled from the assembly-house,
and with a prodigious row and racket of sham fighting are
chased away into the mountains.</q><note place='foot'>Stephen Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), p. 159.</note> In spring, as soon as
the willow-leaves were full grown on the banks of the river,
the Mandan Indians celebrated their great annual festival,
one of the features of which was the expulsion of the devil.
A man, painted black to represent the devil, entered the
village from the prairie, chased and frightened the women,
and acted the part of a buffalo bull in the buffalo dance, the
object of which was to ensure a plentiful supply of buffaloes
during the ensuing year. Finally he was chased from the
village, the women pursuing him with hisses and gibes,
beating him with sticks, and pelting him with dirt.<note place='foot'>G. Catlin, <hi rend='italic'>North American Indians</hi>,
Fourth Edition (London, 1844), i. 166
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>O-kee-pa, a Religious Ceremony,
and other Customs of the
Mandans</hi> (London, 1867).</note> The
Mayas of Yucatan divided the year into eighteen months of
twenty days each, and they added five supplementary days
at the end of the year in order to make a total of three
hundred and sixty-five days. These five supplementary
days were deemed unlucky. In the course of them the
people banished the evils that might threaten them in the
year on which they were about to enter. For that purpose
they made a clay image of the demon of evil Uuayayab,
that is <foreign rend='italic'>u-uayab-haab</foreign>, <q>He by whom the year is poisoned,</q>
confronted it with the deity who had supreme power over
the coming year, and then carried it out of the village in the
direction of that cardinal point to which, on the system of
the Mayan calendar, the particular year was supposed to
belong. Having thus rid themselves of the demon, they
looked forward to a happy New Year.<note place='foot'>Diego de Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des
Choses de Yucatan</hi> (Paris, 1864), pp.
203-205, 211-215; E. Seler, <q>The
Mexican Chronology,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 28</hi>
(Washington, 1904), p. 17. As to
the Maya calendar see further Cyrus
Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>The Maya Year</hi> (Washington,
1894), pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Smithsonian
Institution, Bureau of Ethnology</hi>).</note>
</p>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Expulsion
of a demon
personified
by a man
among the
aborigines
of Queensland.
Expulsion
of demons
embodied
in effigies
in India
and Russia. Expulsion
of demons
embodied
in animals
or boys in
Esthonia
and Spain.</note>
Some of the native tribes of Central Queensland believe
in a noxious being called Molonga, who prowls unseen and
would kill men and violate women if certain ceremonies
were not performed. These ceremonies last for five nights
and consist of dances, in which only men, fantastically
painted and adorned, take part. On the fifth night Molonga
himself, personified by a man tricked out with red ochre and
feathers and carrying a long feather-tipped spear, rushes
forth from the darkness at the spectators and makes as if
he would run them through. Great is the excitement, loud
are the shrieks and shouts, but after another feigned attack
the demon vanishes in the gloom.<note place='foot'>W. E. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnological Studies
among the North-West-Central Queensland
Aborigines</hi> (Brisbane and London,
1897), pp. 120-125.</note> On the last night of
the year the palace of the Kings of Cambodia is purged
of devils. Men painted as fiends are chased by elephants
about the palace courts. When they have been expelled,
a consecrated thread of cotton is stretched round the
palace to keep them out.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>
(Paris, 1883), i. 172. Compare
above, p. 149.</note> In Munzerabad, a district
of Mysore in Southern India, when cholera or smallpox
has broken out in a parish, the inhabitants assemble
and conjure the demon of the disease into a wooden
image, which they carry, generally at midnight, into the
next parish. The inhabitants of that parish in like manner
pass the image on to their neighbours, and thus the
demon is expelled from one village after another, until he
comes to the bank of a river into which he is finally thrown.<note place='foot'>R. H. Elliot, <hi rend='italic'>Experiences of a
Planter in the Jungles of Mysore</hi>
(London, 1871), i. 60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Russian villagers seek to protect themselves against epidemics,
whether of man or beast, by drawing a furrow with a plough
right round the village. The plough is dragged by four
widows and the ceremony is performed at night; all fires and
lights must be extinguished while the plough is going the
round. The people think that no unclean spirit can pass
the furrow which has thus been traced. In the village of
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
Dubrowitschi a puppet is carried before the plough with the
cry, <q>Out of the village with the unclean spirit!</q> and at
the end of the ceremony it is torn in pieces and the fragments
scattered about.<note place='foot'>A. C. Winter, <q>Russische Volksbräuche
bei Seuchen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxix.
(1901) p. 302. For the Russian
ceremony of drawing a plough round
a village to keep out the cattle plague,
see also W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of
the Russian People</hi>, Second Edition
(London, 1872), pp. 396 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> No doubt the demon of the disease is
supposed to be in the puppet and to be destroyed with it.
Sometimes in an Esthonian village a rumour will get about
that the Evil One himself has been seen in the place.
Instantly the whole village is in an uproar, and the entire
population, armed with sticks, flails, and scythes, turns out
to give him chase. They generally expel him in the shape
of a wolf or a cat, occasionally they brag that they have
beaten the devil to death.<note place='foot'>J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsch-russischen
Ostseeprovinzen</hi> (Dresden and Leipsic,
1841), ii. 278.</note> At Carmona, in Andalusia, on
one day of the year, boys are stripped naked and smeared
with glue in which feathers are stuck. Thus disguised, they
run from house to house, the people trying to avoid them
and to bar their houses against them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. (1889)
p. 174.</note> The ceremony is
probably a relic of an annual expulsion of devils.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of the
demon of
plague
among the
Khasis of
Assam. The Tug
of War
probably
a contest
with
demons
represented
by human
beings.
The Tug
of War at
funerals in
Chittagong
and
Burma.</note>
Some of the Khasis of Assam annually expel the demon
of plague. The ceremony is called <foreign rend='italic'>Beh-dieng-khlam</foreign>, that is
<q>Driving away (<foreign rend='italic'>beh</foreign>) the plague (<foreign rend='italic'>khlam</foreign>) with sticks (<foreign rend='italic'>dieng</foreign>)</q>;
it takes place in the Deep-water month (June). On the day
fixed for the expulsion the men rise early and beat the roof
with sticks, calling upon the demon of the plague to leave
the house. Later in the day they go down to the stream
where the goddess Aitan dwells. Then long poles or
bamboos, newly cut, are laid across the stream and the
people jump on them, trying to break them; when they
succeed, they give a great shout. Next a very large pole
or bamboo is similarly laid across the stream, and the people
divide themselves into two parties, one on each side of the
stream, and pull against each other at opposite ends of the
pole. According to one account the party which succeeds
in dragging the pole to their side of the stream is supposed
to gain health and prosperity during the coming year.
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
According to another account, if the people on the east bank
win in the contest or <q>tug-of-war,</q> good luck and prosperity
are assured; but if the people on the west bank are victorious,
then everything will go wrong. On this occasion the people
disguise themselves as giants and wild beasts, and they
parade images of serpents, elephants, tigers, peacocks, and
so on. The men dance with enthusiasm, and the girls,
dressed in their best, look on. Before the assembly breaks
up, the men play a sort of game of hockey with wooden
balls.<note place='foot'>Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <hi rend='italic'>The Khasis</hi>
(London, 1907), p. 157; A. Bastian,
in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft
für Anthropologie, Ethnologie,
und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1881, p. 151; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</hi> (Berlin,
1883), pp. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this ceremonial contest or <q>tug of war</q> between
two parties of the people, we may conjecture that the one
party represents the expelled demons of the plague; and if
that is so, we may perhaps assume that in the struggle the
representatives of the demons generally allow themselves to
be overcome by their adversaries, in order that the village
may be free from pestilence in the coming year. Similarly
in autumn the Central Esquimaux divide themselves into two
parties, representing summer and winter respectively, which
pull at opposite ends of a rope; and they draw omens of
the weather to be expected in the coming winter according
as the party of summer or of winter prevails in the struggle.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Central Eskimo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1888), p. 605.
See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 259.</note>
That in such contests, resembling our English game of
<q>French and English</q> or the <q>Tug of War,</q> the one side
may represent demons is proved by a custom observed by
the Chukmas, a tribe of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in
South-Eastern India. <q>On the death of a Dewan or of a
priest a curious sport is customary at the funeral. The
corpse is conveyed to the place of cremation on a car; to
this car ropes are attached, and the persons attending the
ceremony are divided into two equal bodies and set to work
to pull in opposite directions. One side represents the good
spirits; the other, the powers of evil. The contest is so
arranged that the former are victorious. Sometimes, however,
the young men representing the demons are inclined to
pull too vigorously, but a stick generally quells this unseemly
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
ardour in the cause of evil.</q><note place='foot'>Capt. T. H. Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Races
of South-Eastern India</hi> (London,
1870), p. 185.</note> The contest is like that
between the angels and devils depicted in the frescoes of the
Campo Santo at Pisa. In Burma a similar struggle takes
place at the funeral of a Buddhist monk who passed for a
saint in the popular estimation: ropes are attached to
opposite ends of the car on which the coffin is placed, all
the able-bodied men of the neighbourhood hold on to one or
other of the two ends and pull as if for dear life against
each other; even the women and girls sometimes join in the
tug of war, and policemen have been seen, in a state of
frantic excitement, waving their batons to encourage the
combatants and dragging back shirkers by main force into
the fighting line. The struggle is sometimes prolonged for
hours or even days.<note place='foot'>Father Sangermano, <hi rend='italic'>Description of
the Burmese Empire</hi> (Rangoon, 1885),
p. 98; Capt. C. J. F. S. Forbes,
<hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi> (London, 1878), pp.
216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman,
his Life and Notions</hi> (London, 1882),
ii. 334 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 342.</note> With the example of the Chukmas
before us, we may conjecture that the original motive of this
internecine strife was a persuasion that the eternal happiness
or misery of the departed saint depended on the issue of this
contest between the powers of good and evil for the possession
of his mortal remains.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Tug
of War as
a rain-making
ceremony
in Burma
and else
where.</note>
But in Burma the tug of war has been employed for
more secular purposes than the salvation or perdition of
souls. <q>The inhabitants,</q> we are told, <q>still have a custom
of pulling a rope to produce rain. A rain party and a
drought party tug against each other, the rain party being
allowed the victory, which in the popular notion is generally
followed by rain.</q><note place='foot'>F. E. Sawyer, <q>S. Swithin and
Rainmakers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore Journal</hi>, i.
(1883) p. 214.</note> The mode in which this salutary result
follows from tugging at a rope is explained by the Burmese
doctrine of <foreign rend='italic'>nats</foreign> or spirits who cause rain. But it is only
when these spirits sport in the air that rain falls; when they
shut themselves up in their houses there is drought. Now
in some Burmese writings <q>it is said, that when the sun is
in the path of the goat, these <foreign rend='italic'>Nat</foreign> do not chuse to leave
their houses on account of the great heat, whence there is
then no rain. For this reason, the inhabitants of the Burma
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
empire, in times of drought, are wont to assemble in great
numbers, with drums and a long cable. Dividing themselves
into two parties, with a vast shouting and noise, they drag
the cable contrary ways, the one party endeavouring to get
the better of the other: and they think, by this means, to
invite the <foreign rend='italic'>Nat</foreign> to come out from their houses, and to sport
in the air. The thunder and lightning, which frequently
precede rain, are the clashing and shining of the arms of
these <foreign rend='italic'>Nat</foreign>, who sometimes sport in mock battles.</q><note place='foot'>Francis Buchanan, <q>On the
Religion and Literature of the Burmas,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Asiatick Researches</hi>, vi. (London, 1801)
pp. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Lieut.-General
A. Fytche, <hi rend='italic'>Burma Past and Present</hi>
(London, 1878), i. 248 note 1; Max
and Bertha Ferrars, <hi rend='italic'>Burma</hi> (London,
1900), p. 184; (Sir) J. G. Scott and J.
P. Hardiman, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma
and the Shan States</hi> (Rangoon, 1900-1901),
Part ii. vol. ii. pp. 95, 279.</note> Apparently,
therefore, in the tug of war, practised as a rain-charm,
the one party represent the spirits who have to be dragged
reluctantly from their houses in order to make rain in the
sky. Similarly in the Timor-laut Islands, when the people
want a rainy wind from the west, the population of the
village, men, women, and children divide into two parties
and pull against each other at the end of a long bamboo.
But the party at the eastern end must pull the harder, in
order to draw the desired wind out of the west.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Celebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), p. 282.</note> We can
now perhaps understand why among the Khasis the victory
of the eastern side in the tug of war is thought to prognosticate
good luck and prosperity, and why the victory of the western
side is believed to portend the contrary; the distinction is
at once intelligible when we remember that in the country
of the Khasis the rainy wind is the monsoon which blows
from the south-west, whereas the wind which blows from
the south-east is hot and dry.<note place='foot'>For particulars as to the winds of
Assam I am indebted to my friend Mr.
J. D. Anderson, formerly of the Indian
Civil Service, who resided many years
in that country.</note> Thus a victory of the
eastern party in the tug of war means that they have drawn
rain and consequently fertility into the country from the
west; whereas a victory of the western party signifies that
they have dragged drought and consequently dearth into the
country from the east.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Tug
of War
between
the sexes. The Tug
of War in
Kamtchatka
and New
Guinea.</note>
However, a somewhat different turn is given to the
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
ceremony of rope-pulling in the East Indies by another
writer, who informs us, that while the contest only takes
place in some of these islands when rain is wanted, it is closely
connected with those licentious rites performed for the
fertilization of the ground which have been described in
another part of this work.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According to this account the
men and women appear to take opposite sides in the tug of
war, and in pulling against each other they imitate by their
movements the union of the sexes.<note place='foot'>G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoevell,
<q>Leti-eilanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxxiii. (1890) p. 207. However, it is
not quite clear from the writer's words
(<q><foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>Immers de mannen en vrouwen in
twee partijeen verdeelt en elk een stuk
van de roten in de hande houdende
bootsen toch ook door't voor- en achteroverbuigen
van't lichaam de bewegingen
van cohabitie na</foreign></q>) whether the men
and women take opposite sides or are
distributed between the two.</note> If that is so, it would
seem that the rite is a magical ceremony designed to promote
the fertility of the ground by means of homoeopathic or
imitative magic. The same may perhaps be the intention of
the tug of war as it is practised for the benefit of the crops
by some of the Naga tribes of Assam, and this is the more
likely because in the case of these tribes we are definitely
told that the sexes take opposite sides, the women and girls
tugging against the men and boys. This is done by the
Tangkhuls of Assam a month after the rice has been sown;
the ceremony is performed <q>in order to take the omens for
the future of the crops,</q> and it <q>is followed by considerable
license.</q> The tug of war between the sexes with its
attendant license is repeated before the first-fruits are cut
by the sacred headman.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <hi rend='italic'>The Naga Tribes
of Manipur</hi> (London, 1911), p. 168;
compare 64. <q>The Chirus have six
crop festivals, one of which, that before
the crops are cut, is marked by a rope-pulling
ceremony of the same nature as
that observed among the Tangkhuls</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 172). The headman
(<foreign rend='italic'>khullākpa</foreign>) <q>is a sacrosanct person, the
representative of the village in all
religious rites, and surrounded by
special alimentary, social and conjugal
<foreign rend='italic'>gennas</foreign></q> or taboos (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 110).</note> In Corea about the fifteenth day
of the first month villages engage in the same kind of
contest with each other, and it is thought that the village
which wins will have a good harvest. The rope which they
pull is made of straw, two feet in diameter, with its ends
divided into branches. The men lay hold of the main stem,
while the women grasp the branches, and they often tug
harder than the men, for they load their skirts with stones,
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
which adds weight to the force of their muscles.<note place='foot'>Stewart Culin, <hi rend='italic'>Korean Games</hi>
(Philadelphia, 1895), p. 35; A. C.
Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>The Study of Man</hi> (London
and New York, 1898), p. 274.</note> In
Kamtchatka, when the fishing season is over, the people
used to divide into two parties, one of which tried to pull a
birch-tree by a strap through the smoke-hole into their
subterranean winter dwelling, while the other party outside,
pulling at the end of the tree, endeavoured to hinder them.
If the party in the house succeeded, they raised shouts of
joy and set up a grass effigy of a wolf, which they preserved
carefully throughout the year, believing that it espoused
their young women and prevented them from giving birth to
twins. For they deem the birth of twins a dreadful misfortune
and a horrible sin; they put it down to the wolf in
the forest, and all who chance to be in the house at the
time shew a clean pair of heels, leaving the mother and her
infants to shift for themselves. Should the twins be both
girls, the calamity is even greater.<note place='foot'>G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von
dem Lande Kamtschatka</hi> (Frankfort
and Leipsic, 1774), pp. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the village of Doreh,
in Dutch New Guinea, when some of the inhabitants have
gone on a long journey, the people who stay at home
engage in a Tug of War among themselves to determine
whether the journey will be prosperous or not. One side
represents the voyagers and the other side those who are
left behind. They pull at opposite ends of a long bamboo,
and if the bamboo breaks or the side which represents the
people at home is obliged to let go, the omen is favourable.<note place='foot'>H. von Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der malayisch
Archipel</hi> (Leipsic, 1878), p. 462.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Tug
of War in
Morocco
to procure
rain or
sunshine.</note>
In Morocco, also, the Tug of War is resorted to as a
means of influencing the weather, sometimes in order to
procure rain and sometimes to procure sunshine; and here
men and women appear usually to take opposite sides in
the contest. For example, among the Igliwa, a Berber
people of the Great Atlas, when rain is wanted, they take a
rope and the men pull at one end and women at the other.
While they are tugging away, a man suddenly cuts the rope
and the women fall down. The same device for procuring
rain in time of drought is practised by the Ait Warain,
another Berber tribe of Morocco; but among them in the
heat of the contest the women as well as the men will sometimes
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
let go the rope and allow the opposite party to fall on
their backs. However, the Tsûl, another Berber tribe of
Morocco, employ the Tug of War for the opposite purpose
of ensuring a supply of sunshine and heat in autumn, when
they wish to dry their figs and grapes; the contest takes
place at night by the light of the moon.<note place='foot'>Edward Westermarck, <q>The
Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in
Morocco,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xxii. (1911) pp.
158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ceremonies and Beliefs
connected with Agriculture, Certain
Dates of the Solar Year, and the
Weather in Morocco</hi> (Helsingfors,
1913), p. 122.</note> The apparent
contradiction of employing the same procedure for opposite
purposes vanishes if we suppose that, as the Assamese
custom seems to indicate, the intention is to draw either a
rainy or a dry wind out of the quarters from which the
breezes that bring rain or sunshine usually blow, and which
will usually be on opposite sides of the sky. Hence in order
fully to understand the Tug of War, when it is practised for
the purpose of influencing the weather, we should know, first,
the directions from which the rainy and the dry winds
respectively come in the country under consideration, and
second, the direction in which the rope is stretched between
the contending parties. If, for example, as happens in
Assam, the rainy wind blows from the west, and a victory of
the eastern party in the Tug of War is an omen of prosperity,
we may conclude with a fair degree of probability that the
intention of the contest is to draw the rain from the quarter
of the sky in which it is lingering. But these niceties of
observation have usually escaped the attention of those who
have described the Tug of War.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Games of
ball in
Morocco
to procure
rain or
sunshine.</note>
In various parts of Morocco games of ball are played for
the sake now of procuring rain and now of procuring dry
weather; the ball is sometimes propelled with sticks and
sometimes with the feet of the competitors. An Arab
questioned as to why a game of ball should bring on rain
explained that the ball is dark like a rain-cloud.<note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <hi rend='italic'>Ceremonies and
Beliefs connected with Agriculture,
Certain Dates of the Solar Year, and
the Weather in Morocco</hi> (Helsingfors,
1913). pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Perhaps
the answer furnishes the clue to the meaning of the rite.
If in such games played to influence the weather the ball
represents a rain-cloud, the success or failure of the charm
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
will depend on which side contrives to get the ball home in
the enemy's quarters. For example, if rain is desired and the
rainy wind blows in Morocco, as may perhaps be assumed,
from the west, then should the western side succeed in
driving the ball through the eastern goal, there will be rain;
but if the eastern party wins, then the rain is driven away
and the drought will continue. Thus a game of ball would
in theory and practice answer exactly to the Tug of War
practised for the same purposes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Tug
of War in
Morocco
to ensure
prosperity.</note>
In Morocco, however, the Tug of War is apparently used
also for the purpose of ensuring prosperity in general without
any special reference to the weather. Dr. Westermarck was
informed by an old Arab from the Hiaina that the Tug of
War <q>is no longer practised at the Great Feast, as it was in
his childhood, but that it is performed in the autumn when
the threshing is going on and the fruits are ripe. Then
men and women have a tug of war by moonlight so that the
<foreign rend='italic'>bäs</foreign>, or evil, shall go away, that the year shall be good, and
that the people shall live in peace. Some man secretly cuts
two of the three cords of which the rope is made, with the
result that both parties tumble down.</q><note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <q>The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xxii. (1911) p. 159.</note> In this contest one
party perhaps represents the powers of good and the other the
powers of evil in general. But why in these Moroccan cases
of the Tug of War the rope should be so often cut and one
or both sides laid on their backs, is not manifest. Perhaps
the simple device of suddenly slacking the rope in order to
make the opposite side lose their footing, and so to haul the
rope away from them before they can recover themselves,
may have led to the more trenchant measure of cutting it
with a knife for the same purpose.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Spiritual
significance
of the Tug
of War. The Tug
of War in
French
Guiana,
in North-Western
India.</note>
These examples make it probable that wherever the
Tug of War is played only at certain definite seasons
or on certain particular occasions, it was originally performed,
not as a mere pastime, but as a magical ceremony
designed to work some good for the community. Further,
we may surmise that in many cases the two contending
parties represent respectively the powers of good and
evil struggling against each other for the mastery, and
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
as the community has always an interest in the prevalence
of the powers of good, it may well happen that the
powers of evil do not always get fair play in these conflicts;
though no doubt when it comes to be <q>pull devil, pull
baker,</q> the devil is apt, in the spirit of a true sportsman,
to tug with as hearty good will as his far more deserving
adversary the baker. To take cases in which the game is
played without any alleged practical motive, the Roocooyen
Indians of French Guiana engage in the Tug of War as a
sort of interlude during the ceremonial tortures of the youth.<note place='foot'>H. Coudreau, <hi rend='italic'>Chez nos Indiens,
Quatre Années dans la Guayane Française</hi>
(Paris, 1895), p. 234.</note>
Among the Cingalese the game <q>is connected with the
superstitious worship of the goddess Patiné; and is more
intended for a propitiation to that deity, than considered
as an indulgence, or pursued as an exercise. Two opposite
parties procure two sticks of the strongest and toughest
wood, and so crooked as to hook into one another without
slipping; they then attach strong cords or cable-rattans of
sufficient length to allow of every one laying hold of them.
The contending parties then pull until one of the sticks
gives way.</q> The victorious piece of wood is gaily decorated,
placed in a palanquin, and borne through the village
amid noisy rejoicings, often accompanied with coarse and
obscene expressions.<note place='foot'>Major Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>Eleven Years in
Ceylon</hi> (London, 1840), i. 358.</note> The use of foul language on this
occasion suggests that the ceremony is here, as elsewhere,
observed for the purpose of ensuring fertility. In the
North-Western provinces of India the game is played on
the fourteenth day of the light half of the month Kuar.
The rope (<foreign rend='italic'>barra</foreign>) is made of the grass called <foreign rend='italic'>makra</foreign>, and
is thicker than a man's arm. The various quarters of a
village pull against each other, and the one which is
victorious keeps possession of the rope during the ensuing
year. It is chiefly in the east of these provinces that the
game is played; in the west it is unknown.<note place='foot'>Sir Henry M. Elliot, <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs on
the History, Folk-lore, and Distribution
of the Races of the North-Western
Provinces of India</hi>, edited, revised,
and re-arranged by John Beames (London,
1869), i. 235.</note> Sometimes
the contest is between the inhabitants of neighbouring
villages, and the rope is stretched across the boundary;
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
plenty is supposed to attend the victorious side.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 321.</note> At
the Great Feast, a yearly sacrificial festival of the Mohammedan
world, some tribes in Morocco practise a Tug of
War. Thus among the Ait Sadden it is observed on the
first day of the festival before the sacrifice; among the Ait
Yusi it is performed either before the religious service or in
the afternoon of the same day, and also in the morning of
the Little Feast. Both sexes generally take part in the
contest, the men tugging at one end of the rope and the
women at the other, and sometimes the weaker party applies
for help to persons of the same sex in a neighbouring village.
When they are all hard at it, the men may suddenly let go
the rope and so send the women sprawling on their backs.<note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <q>The Popular
Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xxii. (1911) p. 158.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Tug
of War in
Shropshire
and Radnorshire. Contests
for a ball
(<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>soule</foreign>) in
Normandy.</note>
At Ludlow in Shropshire a grand Tug of War used to take
place on Shrove Tuesday between the inhabitants of Broad
Street Ward on the one side and of Corve Street Ward on
the other. The rope was three inches thick and thirty-six
yards long, with a red knob at one end and a blue knob
at the other. The rope was paid out by the Mayor in
person from a window in the Market Hall at four o'clock
in the afternoon. The shops then put up their shutters,
and the population engaged in the struggle with enthusiasm,
gentle and simple, lawyers and parsons bearing a hand on
one side or the other, till their clothes were torn to tatters
on their backs. The injured were carried into the neighbouring
houses, where their hurts were attended to. If
the party of the Red Knob won, they carried the rope in
triumph to the River Leme and dipped it in the water.
Finally, the rope was sold, the money which it brought in
was devoted to the purchase of beer, and drinking, squabbling,
and fighting ended the happy day. This ancient and
highly popular pastime was suppressed in 1851 on the
frivolous pretext that it gave rise to disorderly scenes and
dangerous accidents.<note place='foot'>John Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities
of Great Britain</hi>, New Edition (London,
1883), i. 92; Miss C. S. Burne
and Miss G. F. Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire
Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1883), pp. 319-321.</note> A similar custom has long been
observed on Shrove Tuesday at Presteign in Radnorshire.
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
The rope is pulled by two parties representing the upper
and the lower portions of the town, who strive to drag it
either to a point in the west wall or to another point in
Broad Street, where the River Lugg is reached.<note place='foot'>C. S. Burne and G. F. Jackson,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 321.</note> In the
Bocage of Normandy most desperate struggles used to take
place between neighbouring parishes on Shrove Tuesday for
the possession of a large leathern ball stuffed with bran and
called a <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>soule</foreign>. The ball was launched on the village green
and contended for by representatives of different parishes,
who sometimes numbered seven or eight hundred, while five
or six thousand people might assemble to witness the combat;
for indeed it was a fight rather than a game. The
conflict was maintained with the utmost fury; old scores
were paid off between personal enemies; there were always
many wounded, and sometimes there were deaths. The aim
of each side was to drive the ball over a stream and to
lodge it in a house of their own parish. It was thought
that the parish which was victorious in the struggle would
have a better crop of apples that year than its neighbours.
At Lande-Patry the ball was provided by the bride who had
been last married, and she had the honour of throwing it
into the arena. The scene of the fiercest battles was
St. Pierre d'Entremont, on the highroad between Condé and
Tinchebray. After several unsuccessful attempts the custom
was suppressed at that village in 1852 with the help of four
or five brigades of police. It is now everywhere extinct.<note place='foot'>Jules Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau,
1883-1887), i. 13, ii. 153-165. Compare
Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi> (Paris,
1875), i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and as to the game
of <hi rend='italic'>soule</hi>, see Guerry, in <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires des
Antiquaires de France</hi>, viii. (1829) pp.
459-461.</note>
The belief that the parish which succeeded in carrying the
ball home would have a better crop of apples that year
raises a presumption that these conflicts were originally
practised as magical rites to ensure fertility. The local
custom of Lande-Patry, which required that the ball should
be provided and thrown by the last bride,<note place='foot'>In the parish of Vieux-Pont, in
the department of Orne, the man who
is last married before the first Sunday
in Lent must throw a ball from the
foot of the cross. The village lads
compete with each other for its possession.
To win it the lad must carry
it through three parishes without being
overtaken by his rivals. See A. de
Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes, et Traditions
des Provinces de France</hi> (Paris and
Lyons, 1846), pp. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> points in the
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
same direction. It is possible that the popular English, or
rather Scotch, game of football had a similar origin: the
winning side may have imagined that they secured good
crops, good weather, or other substantial advantages to their
village or ward.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
sham fights
may represent
contests
with
demons.</note>
In like manner, wherever a sham or a real conflict
takes place between two parties annually, above all at the
New Year, we may suspect that the old intention was
to ensure prosperity in some form for the people throughout
the following year, whether by obtaining possession of a
material object in which the luck of the year was supposed
to be embodied, or by defeating and driving away a band
of men who personated the powers of evil. For example,
among the Tenggerese of eastern Java the New Year festival
regularly includes a sham fight fought between two bands
of men, who are armed with spears and swords and advance
against each other again and again at a dancing step, thrusting
at their adversaries with their spears, but always taking
care to miss their aim.<note place='foot'>J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, <q>Die
Tenggeresen, ein alter Javanischer
Volksstamm,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
liii. (1901) pp. 140
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, in Ferghana, a province of
Turkestan, it is or used to be customary on the first day
of the year for the king and chiefs to divide into two parties,
each of which chose a champion. Then the two champions,
clad in armour, engaged in a combat with each other, while
the crowd joined in with bricks and stones. When one of
them was slain the scrimmage stopped, and omens were
drawn as to whether the year on which they had entered
would be prosperous or the reverse.<note place='foot'>Edouard Chavannes, <hi rend='italic'>Documents
sur les Tou-Kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1903), p. 148.</note> In these combats it
seems probable that one side represents the demons or other
powers of evil whom the people hope to vanquish and expel
at the beginning of the New Year.
</p>

<p>
Oftener, however, the expelled demons are not represented
at all, but are understood to be present invisibly in
the material and visible vehicle which conveys them away.
Here, again, it will be convenient to distinguish between occasional
and periodical expulsions. We begin with the former.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Occasional of Evils in a Material Vehicle.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled in
a small ship
in Ceram.</note>
The vehicle which conveys away the demons may be of
various kinds. A common one is a little ship or boat.
Thus, in the southern district of the island of Ceram, when
a whole village suffers from sickness, a small ship is made
and filled with rice, tobacco, eggs, and so forth, which have
been contributed by all the people. A little sail is hoisted
on the ship. When all is ready, a man calls out in a very
loud voice, <q>O all ye sicknesses, ye smallpoxes, agues,
measles, etc., who have visited us so long and wasted us
so sorely, but who now cease to plague us, we have made
ready this ship for you and we have furnished you with
provender sufficient for the voyage. Ye shall have no lack
of food nor of betel-leaves nor of areca nuts nor of tobacco.
Depart, and sail away from us directly; never come near us
again; but go to a land which is far from here. Let all
the tides and winds waft you speedily thither, and so convey
you thither that for the time to come we may live sound
and well, and that we may never see the sun rise on you
again.</q> Then ten or twelve men carry the vessel to the
shore, and let it drift away with the land-breeze, feeling convinced
that they are free from sickness for ever, or at least
till the next time. If sickness attacks them again, they are
sure it is not the same sickness, but a different one, which
in due time they dismiss in the same manner. When the
demon-laden bark is lost to sight, the bearers return to the
village, whereupon a man cries out, <q>The sicknesses are now
gone, vanished, expelled, and sailed away.</q> At this all the
people come running out of their houses, passing the word
from one to the other with great joy, beating on gongs and
on tinkling instruments.<note place='foot'>François Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud- en nieuw
Ost-Indiën</hi> (Dordrecht and Amsterdam,
1724-1726), iii. 14. L. de
Backer (<hi rend='italic'>L'Archipel Indien</hi>, Paris, 1874,
pp. 377 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) copies from Valentyn.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons of
sickness
expelled in
a small ship
in Timor-laut,
in
a ship in
Buru,
removed
from the
persons of
the sufferers.</note>
Similar ceremonies are commonly resorted to in other
East Indian islands. Thus in Timor-laut, to mislead the
demons who are causing sickness, a small proa, containing
the image of a man and provisioned for a long voyage, is
allowed to drift away with wind and tide. As it is being
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
launched, the people cry, <q>O sickness, go from here; turn
back; what do you here in this poor land?</q> Three days
after this ceremony a pig is killed, and part of the flesh is
offered to Dudilaa, who lives in the sun. One of the oldest
men says, <q>Old sir, I beseech you make well the grandchildren,
children, women, and men, that we may be able to
eat pork and rice and to drink palm-wine. I will keep my
promise. Eat your share, and make all the people in the
village well.</q> If the proa is stranded at any inhabited spot,
the sickness will break out there. Hence a stranded proa
excites much alarm amongst the coast population, and they
immediately burn it, because demons fly from fire.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), pp. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
island of Buru the proa which carries away the demons of
disease is about twenty feet long, rigged out with sails, oars,
anchor, and so on, and well stocked with provisions. For a
day and a night the people beat gongs and drums, and rush
about to frighten the demons. Next morning ten stalwart
young men strike the people with branches, which have been
previously dipped in an earthen pot of water. As soon as
they have done so, they run down to the beach, put the
branches on board the proa, launch another boat in great
haste, and tow the disease-burdened bark far out to sea.
There they cast it off, and one of them calls out, <q>Grandfather
Smallpox, go away&mdash;go willingly away&mdash;go visit
another land; we have made you food ready for the voyage,
we have now nothing more to give.</q> When they have
landed, all the people bathe together in the sea.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 25
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this
ceremony the reason for striking the people with the branches
is clearly to rid them of the disease-demons, which are then
supposed to be transferred to the branches. Hence the
haste with which the branches are deposited in the proa and
towed away to sea. So in the inland districts of Ceram,
when smallpox or other sickness is raging, the priest strikes
all the houses with consecrated branches, which are then
thrown into the river, to be carried down to the sea;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 141.</note> exactly
as amongst the Wotyaks of Russia the sticks which have
been used for expelling the devils from the village are thrown
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
into the river, that the current may sweep the baleful burden
away.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>.</note> In Amboyna, for a similar purpose, the whole body
of the patient is rubbed with a live white cock, which is then
placed on a little proa and committed to the waves;<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 78.</note> and
in the Babar archipelago the bark which is to carry away to
sea the sickness of a whole village contains a bowl of ashes
taken from every kitchen in the village, and another bowl
into which all the sick people have spat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 357.</note> The plan of
putting puppets in the boat to represent sick persons, in
order to lure the demons after them, is not uncommon.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 266, 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 327, 357;
H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>Natives of Sarawak
and British North Borneo</hi> (London,
1896), i. 284.</note> For
example, most of the pagan tribes on the coast of Borneo
seek to drive away epidemic disease as follows. They carve
one or more rough human images from the pith of the sago
palm and place them on a small raft or boat or full-rigged
Malay ship together with rice and other food. The boat is
decked with blossoms of the areca palm and with ribbons
made from its leaves, and thus adorned the little craft is
allowed to float out to sea with the ebb-tide, bearing, as the
people fondly think or hope, the sickness away with it.<note place='foot'>Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <hi rend='italic'>The
Pagan Tribes of Borneo</hi> (London, 1912),
ii. 122 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of disease
expelled in
a ship in
Selangor.</note>
In Selangor, one of the native states in the Malay
Peninsula, the ship employed in the export of disease is, or
used to be, a model of a special kind of Malay craft called a
<foreign rend='italic'>lanchang</foreign>. This was a two-masted vessel with galleries fore and
aft, armed with cannon, and used by Malay rajahs on the coast
of Sumatra. So gallant a ship would be highly acceptable
to the spirits, and to make it still more beautiful in their
eyes it was not uncommonly stained yellow with turmeric
or saffron, for among the Malays yellow is the royal colour.
Some years ago a very fine model of a <foreign rend='italic'>lanchang</foreign>, with its
cargo of sickness, was towed down the river to sea by the
Government steam launch. A common spell uttered at the
launching of one of these ships runs as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Ho, elders of the upper reaches,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Elders of the lower reaches,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Elders of the dry land</hi>,</l>
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Elders of the river-flats,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Assemble ye, O people, lords of hill and hill-foot,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lords of cavern and hill-locked basin,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lords of the deep primeval forest,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lords of the river-bends,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Come on board this</hi> lanchang, <hi rend='italic'>assembling in your multitudes.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>So may ye depart with the ebbing stream,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Depart on the passing breeze,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Depart in the yawning earth,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Depart in the red-dyed earth.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Go ye to the ocean which has no wave,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And the plain where no green herb grows,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And never return hither.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>But if ye return hither,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ye shall be consumed by the curse.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>At sea ye shall get no drink,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ashore ye shall get no food,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>But gape in vain about the world</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi> (London,
1900), pp. 433-435. For other examples
of sending away plague-laden boats in the
Malay region see J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 181, 210; R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen
van het eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Nederlandsch Indië</hi>, N.S., viii. (1879)
p. 104; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>, i. 147;
C. Hupe, <q>Korte verhandeling over
de godsdienst, zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</hi>,
1846, dl. iii. 150; C. F. H. Campen,
<q>De godsdienstbegrippen der Halmaherasche
Alfoeren,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxvii. (1882) p. 441; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society</hi>, No. 12, pp. 229-231; A. L.
van Hasselt, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van
Midden-Sumatra</hi> (Leyden, 1882), p.
98; C. M. Pleyte, <q>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig
Genootschap</hi>, Tweede Serie, x.
(1893) p. 835; H. Ling Roth,
<q>Low's Natives of Sarawak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxii,
(1893) p. 25; C. Snouck Hurgronje,
<hi rend='italic'>De Atjehers</hi> (Batavia and Leyden, 1893-1894),
i. 461 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. A. Jacobsen, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen
in der Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres</hi>
(Berlin, 1896), p. 110.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled in
small ships
in New
Guinea,
the Philippines,
Tikopia,
and the
Nicobar
Islands.</note>
The practice of sending away diseases in boats is known
outside the limits of the Malay region. Thus when smallpox
raged among the Yabim of German New Guinea, they
used to make a little model of a canoe with mast, sail,
and rudder. Then they said to the small vessel, on which
the spirit of smallpox was supposed to have taken his
passage, <q>Bear him away to another village. When the
people come forth to draw you ashore, give them <q>the
thing</q> and do to them what you have done to us.</q> Lest
the spirit should be hungry on the voyage, they put some
taro on board, and to make sure of getting rid of the disease,
they wiped their hands on the tiny canoe, after which they
let it drift away. It often happened that the wind or
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
tide drove the vessel back to the place from which it
started. Then there would be a deafening rub-a-dub of
drums and blowing of shell-trumpets; and the little ship, or
rather its invisible passenger, would be again apostrophized,
<q>Do go away, you have already raged among us so that the
air is poisoned with the stench of corpses.</q> If this time it
sailed away, they would stand on the shore and watch it
with glad hearts disappearing; then they would climb the
trees to get a last glimpse of it till it vanished in the distance.
After that they came down joyfully and said to each
other, <q>We have had enough of it. The sickness has happily
gone away.</q><note place='foot'>H. Zahn, <q>Die Jabim,</q> in R.
Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(1911) pp. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the Tagbanuas and other tribes of the
Philippines suffered from epidemics, they used to make little
models of ships, supply them with rice and fresh drinking
water, and launch them on the sea, in order that the evil
spirits might sail away in them.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Über die Eingeborenen
der Insel Palawan und der Inselgruppe
der Talamianen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lix.
(1891) p. 183.</note> When the people of
Tikopia, a small island in the Pacific, to the north of the
New Hebrides, were attacked by an epidemic cough, they
made a little canoe and adorned it with flowers. Four sons
of the principal chiefs carried it on their shoulders all round
the island, accompanied by the whole population, some
of whom beat the bushes, while others uttered loud cries.
On returning to the spot from which they had set out, they
launched the canoe on the sea.<note place='foot'>J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour
du monde et à la recherche de La
Pérouse, sur la corvette Astrolabe</hi> (Paris,
1832-1833), v. 311.</note> In the Nicobar Islands, in
the Bay of Bengal, when there is much sickness in a village
or no fish are caught, the blame is laid upon the spirits.
They must be propitiated with offerings. All relations and
friends are invited, a huge pig is roasted, and the best of it
is eaten, but some parts are offered to the shades. The
heap of offerings remains in front of the house till it is carried
away by the rising tide. Then the priests, their faces reddened
with paint and swine's blood, pretend to catch the demon of
disease, and after a hand-to-hand tussle, force him into a
model boat, made of leaves and decked with garlands, which
is then towed so far to sea that neither wind nor tide is
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
likely to drive it back to the shore.<note place='foot'>Roepstorff, <q>Ein Geisterboot der
Nicobaresen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi> (1881), p.
401; W. Svoboda, <q>Die Bewohner
des Nikobaren-Archipels,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
vi. (1893) pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Annam, when the
population of a village has been decimated by cholera, they
make a raft and lade it with offerings of money and food,
such as a sucking pig, bananas, and oranges. Sticks of
incense also smoke on the floating altar; and when all is
ready and earnest prayers have been uttered, the raft is
abandoned to the current of the river. The people hope
that the demon of cholera, allured and gratified by these
offerings, will float away on the raft and trouble them no
more.<note place='foot'>P. Denjoy, <q>An-nam, Médecins
et Sorciers, Remèdes et Superstitions,</q>
etc., <hi rend='italic'>Bulletins de la Société d'Anthropologie
de Paris</hi>, v. (1894) pp. 409 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare É. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans
le Laos</hi> (Paris, 1895-1897), i. 121.
For Siamese applications of the same
principle to the cure of individuals,
see A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. (Jena, 1867) pp. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
485 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demons
of sickness
expelled in
the form of
animals in
India.</note>
Often the vehicle which carries away the collected demons
or ills of a whole community is an animal or scapegoat.
In the Central Provinces of India, when cholera breaks out
in a village, every one retires after sunset to his house. The
priests then parade the streets, taking from the roof of each
house a straw, which is burnt with an offering of rice, ghee,
and turmeric, at some shrine to the east of the village.
Chickens daubed with vermilion are driven away in the
direction of the smoke, and are believed to carry the disease
with them. If they fail, goats are tried, and last of all pigs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. p. 48,
§ 418 (January, 1884).</note>
When cholera rages among the Bhars, Malians, and Kurmis
of India, they take a goat or a buffalo&mdash;in either case the
animal must be a female, and as black as possible&mdash;then
having tied some grain, cloves, and red lead in a yellow cloth on
its back they turn it out of the village. The animal is conducted
beyond the boundary and not allowed to return.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, iii. p. 81, § 373 (February
1886).</note>
Sometimes the buffalo is marked with a red pigment and
driven to the next village, where he carries the plague with
him.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 142. Bulls are
used as scapegoats for cholera in
Cashmeer (H. G. M. Murray-Aynsley,
in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iv. (1893) pp. 398 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> The people of the city and cantonments of Sagar being
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
afflicted with a violent influenza, General Sir William Sleeman
received a request from the old Queen Dowager of
Sagar <q>to allow of a noisy religious procession for the purpose
of imploring deliverance from this great calamity. Men,
women, and children in this procession were to do their
utmost to add to the noise by <q>raising their voices in
psalmody,</q> beating upon their brass pots and pans with all
their might, and discharging firearms where they could get
them; and before the noisy crowd was to be driven a
buffalo, which had been purchased by general subscription,
in order that every family might participate in the merit.
They were to follow it out for eight miles, where it was to be
turned loose for any man who would take it. If the animal
returned, the disease, it was said, must return with it, and
the ceremony be performed over again.... It was, however,
subsequently determined that the animal should be a
goat, and he was driven before the crowd accordingly. I
have on several occasions been requested to allow of such
noisy <foreign rend='italic'>pūjās</foreign> in cases of epidemics.</q><note place='foot'>Major-General Sir W. H. Sleeman,
<hi rend='italic'>Rambles and Recollections of
Indian Official</hi>, New Edition (Westminster,
1893), i. 203.</note> Once, when influenza
was raging in Pithoria, a village to the north-west of Sagar,
a man had a small carriage made, after a plan of his own,
for a pair of scapegoats, which were harnessed to it and
driven to a wood at some distance, where they were let loose.
From that hour the disease entirely ceased in the town. The
goats never returned; had they done so, it was affirmed that
the disease must have come back with them.<note place='foot'>Major-General Sir W. H. Sleeman,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 198.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Goats and
cocks employed
as
scapegoats
in various
parts of
India.</note>
The use of a scapegoat is not uncommon in the hills of the
Eastern Ghats. In 1886, during a severe outbreak of smallpox,
the people of Jepur did reverence to a goat, marched it to
the Ghats, and let it loose on the plains.<note place='foot'>F. Fawcett, <q>On the Saoras (or
Savaras), an Aboriginal Hill People of
the Eastern Ghats,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Society of Bombay</hi>, i.
213, note.</note> In Southern
Konkan, on the appearance of cholera, the villagers went in
procession from the temple to the extreme boundaries of the
village, carrying a basket of cooked rice covered with red
powder, a wooden doll representing the pestilence, and a
cock. The head of the cock was cut off at the village
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
boundary, and the body was thrown away. When cholera
had thus been transferred from one village to another, the
second village observed the same ceremony and passed
on the scourge to its neighbours, and so on through a
number of villages.<note place='foot'>Mr. Y. V. Athalye, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Society of Bombay</hi>,
i. 37.</note> Among the Korwas of Mirzapur,
when cholera has broken out, the priest offers a black
cock or, if the disease is very malignant, a black goat, at
the shrine of the local deity, and then drives the animal
away in the direction of some other village. But it has
not gone far before he overtakes it, kills it, and eats it;
which he may do with perfect safety in virtue of his
sacred office. Again, when cholera is raging among the
Pataris, an aboriginal Dravidian race of South Mirzapur,
the wizard and the village elders feed a black cock with
grain and drive it beyond the boundaries, ordering the fowl
to take the disease away with it. A little oil, red lead, and
a spangle worn by a woman on her forehead are usually
fastened to the bird's head before it is let loose. The cost
of purchasing the cock is defrayed by public subscription.
When such a bird of ill-omen appears in a village, the priest
takes it to the shrine of the local deity and sacrifices it there;
but sometimes he merely bows before it at the shrine and
passes it on to some other village. If a murrain attacks their
cattle, the Kharwars of Northern India take a black cock
and put red lead on its head, antimony on its eyes, a spangle
on its forehead, and a pewter bangle on its leg; thus arrayed
they let it loose, calling out to the disease, <q>Mount on the
fowl and go elsewhere into the ravines and thickets; destroy
the sin.</q> Perhaps, as has been suggested, this tricking out
of the bird with women's ornaments may be a relic of some
grosser form of expiation in which a human being was
sacrificed or banished.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes
and Castes of the North-Western Provinces
and Oudh</hi> (Calcutta, 1896), iii.
445.</note> Charms of this sort in India no
doubt date from a remote antiquity. An ancient Indian
book of magic, known as the <hi rend='italic'>Kausika Sutra</hi>, describes a
ceremony of letting loose against a hostile army a white-footed
ewe in which the power of disease was believed to be
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
incarnate.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Kausika Sutra</hi>, xiv. 22 (W.
Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches Zauberritual</hi>,
Amsterdam, 1900, p. 29); H. Oldenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des Veda</hi> (Berlin,
1894), p. 498.</note> In the same treatise we read of a mode of
getting rid of ill-luck by fastening a hook to the left leg of
a crow, attaching a sacrificial cake to the hook, and then
letting the bird fly away in a south-westerly direction, while
the priest or magician recites as usual the appropriate
formula.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Kausika Sutra</hi>, xviii. 16 (W.
Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches Zauberritual</hi>, pp.
44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cows,
toads, and
llamas as
scapegoats
in Africa
and
America.</note>
Amongst the Dinkas, a pastoral people of the White
Nile, each family possesses a sacred cow. When the
country is threatened with war, famine, or any other public
calamity, the chiefs of the village require a particular family
to surrender their sacred cow to serve as a scapegoat. The
animal is driven by the women to the brink of the river and
across it to the other bank, there to wander in the wilderness
and fall a prey to ravening beasts. Then the women
return in silence and without looking behind them; were
they to cast a backward glance, they imagine that the
ceremony would have no effect.<note place='foot'>Dom Daniel Sour Dharim Dena
(a Dinka convert), in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, lx. (1888) pp.
57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When influenza broke
out in a virulent form among the negroes of Togoland
during the winter of 1892, the natives set the trouble down
to the machinations of evil spirits, who must be expelled the
country. The principal instrument of expulsion was a fat
toad, which was dragged through the streets of every town
or village, followed by an elder who sprinkled holy water to
right and left. All the evil was thus concentrated in the
toad, which was finally thrown away into the forest. Thus
the natives expected to rid the village of the influenza.<note place='foot'>H. Seidel, <q>Krankheit, Tod, und
Begräbnis bei den Togonegern,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxii. (1897) p. 24.</note> In
1857, when the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru were
suffering from a plague, they loaded a black llama with the
clothes of the plague-stricken people, sprinkled brandy on the
clothes, and then turned the animal loose on the mountains,
hoping that it would carry the pest away with it.<note place='foot'>D. Forbes, <q>On the Aymara
Indians of Bolivia and Peru,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Ethnological Society of London</hi>,
vol. ii. No. 3 (October, 1870), p. 237.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Goddess of
disease expelled
in a
toy chariot.</note>
In some parts of India a principal means of expelling
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
an epidemic is a little toy chariot called a <foreign rend='italic'>ratha</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>rath</foreign>, in
which the goddess of the disease is supposed to be carted
away. It is carried or drawn in procession to the next
village, the inhabitants of which pass it on in like manner,
with great alacrity, to their neighbours. Thus the goddess
and the plague are transferred from village to village, until
at last they come to one which is so far away from its
next neighbour that the people do not care to undertake
the long weary journey. In that case they content themselves
with conveying the chariot to a place so shut in by
hills that the disease cannot possibly escape, and there they
leave it to die. Or if the village is near the sea, they drown
the sickness by throwing the chariot into the water. However,
in Central India the real home of the goddess of
cholera is at Unkareshwar; and accordingly the chariot in
which she is politely escorted out of a village is finally
deposited at or near that place. It is usual and proper for
the people of a village to give a friendly notice to their
neighbours that they are going to cart the cholera, smallpox,
or whatever it may be, to their village, so that the inhabitants
may be ready to receive the goddess with due
honour and to escort her on her progress. But some unneighbourly
folk, without giving notice, go by night and
stealthily deposit the chariot on the outskirts of the next
village. If the inhabitants are not on the watch, and suffer
the fatal little vehicle to remain there, the disease will
naturally cleave to them. Sometimes, perhaps generally, the
procession with the chariot is accompanied by a goat, a
cock, and a pot of native beer or wine, which serve as
additional attractions to the goddess to set out on her
travels.<note place='foot'>Jivangi Jimshedji Modi, B.A.,
<q>On the Chariot of the Goddess, a
Supposed Remedy for driving out an
Epidemic,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Society of Bombay</hi>, vol. iv. No. 8
(Bombay, 1899), pp. 420-424; Captain
C. Eckford Luard, in <hi rend='italic'>Census of India,
1901</hi>, vol. xix., <hi rend='italic'>Central India</hi> (Lucknow,
1902), p. 78.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
scapegoats
in Uganda.</note>
Occasionally the scapegoat is a man. For example,
from time to time the gods used to warn the King of
Uganda that his foes the Banyoro were working magic
against him and his people to make them die of disease.
To avert such a catastrophe the king would send a scapegoat
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
to the frontier of Bunyoro, the land of the enemy.
The scapegoat consisted of either a man and a boy or a
woman and her child, chosen because of some mark or
bodily defect, which the gods had noted and by which the
victims were to be recognized. With the human victims were
sent a cow, a goat, a fowl, and a dog; and a strong guard escorted
them to the land which the god had indicated. There the
limbs of the victims were broken and they were left to die
a lingering death in the enemy's country, being too crippled
to crawl back to Uganda. The disease or plague was
thought to have been thus transferred to the victims and to
have been conveyed back in their persons to the land from
which it came. So, too, after a war the gods sometimes
advised the king to send back a scapegoat in order to free
the warriors from some evil that had attached itself to the
army. One of the women slaves, a cow, a goat, a fowl, and
a dog would be chosen from among the captives and sent
back to the borders of the country whence they had come;
there they were maimed and left to die. After that the
army would be pronounced clean and allowed to return to
the capital. In each case a bundle of herbs would be rubbed
over the people and the cattle, and would then be tied to the
victims, who would thus carry back the evil with them.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 342.</note> A
similar use of scapegoats, human and animal, was regularly
made after a King of Uganda had been crowned. Two men
were brought to the king; one of them he wounded slightly
with an arrow shot from a bow. The man was then sent
away, under a strong guard, as a scapegoat to Bunyoro, the
enemy's country, and with him were sent a cow, a goat, and
a dog. On his sad journey he took with him the dust and
ashes of the sacred fire, which had burned day and night
at the entrance to the late king's enclosure and had been
extinguished, as usual, at his death. Arrived at their
destination, the man and the animals were maimed and
left to die. They were believed to bear away with them
any uncleanness that might cleave to the new King or
Queen.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>, pp.
109, 200. As to the perpetual fire at
the entrance to a king's enclosure, see
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp. 103, 197, 202 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
scapegoats
in China
and India.
Indian
ceremony
of sliding
down a
rope.</note>
Some of the aboriginal tribes of China, as a protection
against pestilence, select a man of great muscular strength
to act the part of scapegoat. Having besmeared his face
with paint, he performs many antics with the view of
enticing all pestilential and noxious influences to attach
themselves to him only. He is assisted by a priest. Finally
the scapegoat, hotly pursued by men and women beating
gongs and tom-toms, is driven with great haste out of the
town or village.<note place='foot'>J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi> (London, 1878),
ii. 306.</note> In the Punjaub a cure for the murrain is
to hire a man of the Chamar caste, turn his face away from
the village, brand him with a red-hot sickle, and let him go out
into the jungle taking the murrain with him. He must not
look back.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. p. 75,
§ 598 (April, 1884); W. Crooke,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of
Northern India</hi> (Westminster, 1896),
i. 170.</note> When disease breaks out among a herd, the
Oraons take the herdsman himself, tie a wooden bell from one
of the cows round his neck, beat him with sticks, and drive
him out of the village to a cross-road, where the bell and
sticks are deposited.<note place='foot'>Rev. F. Hahn, <q>Some Notes on
the Religion and Superstitions of the
Orāōs</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal</hi>, lxxii. Part iii. (Calcutta,
1904) p. 17; compare H. C. Streatfield,
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 37.</note> In the territory of Kumaon, lying on
the southern slopes of the Western Himalayas, the custom
of employing a human scapegoat appears to have taken
a somewhat peculiar form in the ceremony known as Barat.
First of all a thick rope of grass is stretched from the top of
a cliff to the valley beneath, where it is made fast to posts
driven into the ground. Next a wooden saddle, with a very
sharp ridge and unpadded, is attached by thongs to the
cable, along which it runs in a deep groove. A man now
seats himself on the saddle and is strapped to it, while sand-bags
or heavy stones are suspended from his feet to secure
his balance. Then, after various ceremonies have been performed
and a kid sacrificed, he throws himself as far back in
the saddle as he can go, and is started off to slide down the
rope into the valley. Away he shoots at an ever-increasing
speed; the saddle under him, however well greased, emits
volumes of smoke during the greater part of his progress;
and he is nearly senseless when he reaches the bottom.
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
Here men are waiting to catch him and run forward with
him some distance in order to break gradually the force of
his descent. This ceremony, regarded as a propitiation
of Mahadeva, is performed as a means of delivering a community
from present or impending calamity. Thus, for
example, it was performed when cholera was raging at
Almora, and the people traced the immunity they enjoyed
to the due observance of the rite. Each district has its
hereditary Badi, as the performer is called; he is supported
by annual contributions in grain from the inhabitants, as well
as by special payments for each performance. When the
ceremony is over, the grass rope is cut up and distributed
among the villagers, who hang the pieces as charms at the
eaves of their houses; and they preserve the hair of the Badi
for a similar purpose. Yet while his severed locks bring
fertility to other people's lands, he entails sterility on his
own; and it is firmly believed that no seed sown by his hand
could ever sprout. Formerly the rule prevailed that, if
a Badi had the misfortune to fall from the rope in the course
of his flying descent, he was immediately despatched with
a sword by the spectators. The rule has naturally been
abolished by the English Government; but its former observance
seems to indicate that the custom of letting a man
slide down a rope as a charm to avert calamity is only
a mitigation of an older custom of putting him to death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes and Queries</hi>,
i. pp. 55, 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 77, §§ 417, 499,
516 (July and August, 1891), quoting
G. W. Traill, <hi rend='italic'>Statistical Sketch of
Kumaun</hi>, pp. 68 sq., and Moorcroft
and Trebeck, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Himalayan
Provinces of Hindustan and the Panjáb</hi>,
i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare E. T. Atkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western
Provinces of India</hi>, ii. (Allahabad,
1884), pp. 834 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tibetan
New Year
ceremony
of sliding
down a
rope.</note>
A somewhat similar ceremony is annually performed at
Lhasa a few days after the beginning of the Tibetan New
Year, which falls in spring. The scene of the performance
is Potala Hill, on the summit and slope of which is built the
superb castle of the Grand Lama of Tibet, a massive and
imposing pile of buildings which attracts the eye and
dominates the landscape from afar. On the day in question
a rope of hide is stretched from the top to the bottom of the
steep hill, and men from a distant province of Tibet climb
up it with the agility of monkeys. They are called Flying
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
Spirits. Arrived at the top, each of them places a piece of
wood on his breast, stretches out his hands and feet, and
letting himself go shoots down the rope (in the words of a
Chinese writer) <q>like the bolt flying from the bow, or the
swallow skimming the water. 'Tis a wondrous sight!</q>
Considering that these performers are called Spirits, and that
the performance takes place a few days after the New Year,
a season so commonly selected for the expulsion of demons,
we may conjecture that the Flying Spirits represent the
powers of evil who are thus shot out of the Tibetan pope's
palace at the beginning of the year.<note place='foot'>W. Woodville Rockhill, <q>Tibet,
A Geographical, Ethnographical, and
Historical Sketch, derived from Chinese
Sources,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society for 1891</hi> (London, 1891), p.
209. Compare Hue, <hi rend='italic'>Souvenirs d'un
Voyage dans la Tartarie et le Thibet</hi>,
Sixième Édition (Paris, 1878), ii. 379
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For a description of Potala Hill
and its grand palace, see L. Austine
Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>Lhasa and its Mysteries</hi>
(London, 1905), pp. 330 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 387 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>


<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Periodic
expulsion
of evils in
a material
vehicle.
Periodic
expulsion
of spirits
in rafts
from Perak.</note>
In this last case the expulsion of evils, if I am right in
so interpreting the ceremony, is periodic, not occasional,
being repeated every spring at the beginning of a new year.
It brings us accordingly to the consideration of a whole
class of such cases, for the mediate expulsion of evils by
means of a scapegoat or other material vehicle, like the
immediate expulsion of them in invisible form, tends to
become periodic, and for a like reason. Thus in Perak, a
state on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula, it was in
ancient times the custom to perform periodically a ceremony
intended to ensure the prosperity of the country by the
propitiation of friendly spirits and the expulsion of evil
influences. The writer who records the custom is uncertain
as to the period which elapsed between two successive
celebrations; he suggests with hesitation that the rite was
performed once in seven years or once in a Rajah's reign.
The name of the ceremony was <foreign rend='italic'>pĕlas negri</foreign>, which means
<q>the cleansing of the country from evils.</q> When the time
came, the Rajah, the chiefs, and a great following of people
assembled at a point as far up the river as possible, but
short of the rapids which further up impede navigation.
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
There a number of rafts were prepared, some of them
elaborately built with houses on them. Four of them were
devoted to the four great classes of spirits which are found
in Perak, namely the <foreign rend='italic'>Hantu Blian</foreign> or <q>Tiger-spirits,</q> the
<foreign rend='italic'>Hantu Sungkei</foreign>, the <foreign rend='italic'>Hantu Malayu</foreign>, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Jin Raja</foreign>. In
each of these rafts a number of wizards (<foreign rend='italic'>pawangs</foreign>) took up
their post, according to the particular class of demon which
they affected. The procession was headed by the raft
devoted to the Tiger-spirits; and in it was set up a <foreign rend='italic'>prah</foreign>
tree with all its branches, kept erect by stays. It was
followed by the three rafts dedicated to the other three
classes of spirits, and behind them came a train of other
rafts bearing mere common mortals, the royal bandsmen, the
Rajah himself, the chiefs, and the people. As the long
procession floated down the river with the current, the
wizards, standing on sheets of tin, waved white cloths and
shouted invocations to the spirits and demons who inhabited
the country through which the rafts were drifting seaward.
The burden of the invocations was to invite the spirits and
demons to come aboard the rafts and partake of the food
which had been considerately made ready for them. At
every village on the bank large enough to possess a mosque
(for the Malays of Perak are professing Mohammedans)
the procession halted; a buffalo, subscribed for by the
inhabitants, was slaughtered, and its head placed on one of
the spirit-barks, while people feasted on the flesh. The
ceremony ended at Bras Basah, a village on the left bank of
the Perak river, not far from its mouth. There the rafts
were abandoned to the current, which swept them out to sea,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Notes and Queries</hi>, No. 3
(Singapore, 1886), pp. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
doubtless bearing with them the hapless demons who had
been lured by the tempting viands to embark and were now
left to toss forlorn on the great deep at the mercy of the
waves and the winds.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of evils in
small ships
in the
Indian
Archipelago.</note>
Again, every year, generally in March, the people
of Leti, Moa, and Lakor, islands of the Indian Archipelago,
send away all their diseases to sea. They make
a proa about six feet long, rig it with sails, oars, rudder,
and other gear, and every family deposits in it some rice,
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
fruit, a fowl, two eggs, insects that ravage the fields, and
so on. Then they let it drift away to sea, saying, <q>Take
away from here all kinds of sickness, take them to other
islands, to other lands, distribute them in places that lie
eastward, where the sun rises.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>
(The Hague, 1886), p. 393.</note> The Biajas of Borneo
annually send to sea a little bark laden with the sins and
misfortunes of the people. The crew of any ship that falls
in with the ill-omened bark at sea will suffer all the sorrows
with which it is laden.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der
Geschichte</hi> (Leipsic, 1860), ii. 93.</note> A like custom is annually observed
by the Dusuns of the Tuaran district in British North Borneo.
The ceremony is the most important of the whole year. Its
aim is to bring good luck to the village during the ensuing
year by solemnly expelling all the evil spirits that may
have collected in or about the houses throughout the last
twelve months. The task of routing out the demons and
banishing them devolves chiefly on women, who indeed play
the principal part in all religious ceremonies among the
Dusuns, while the humble duty of beating drums and
banging gongs is discharged by members of the inferior sex.
On this momentous occasion a procession of women, in full
ceremonial dress, goes from house to house, stopping at each
to go through their performances. At the head of the
procession marches a boy carrying a spear on which is
impaled a bundle of palm leaves containing rice. He is
followed by two men, who carry a large gong and a drum
slung on a pole between them. Then come the women.
One of them carries a small sucking pig in a basket on her
back; and all of them bear wands, with which they belabour
the little pig at the appropriate moment; its squeals help
to attract the vagrant spirits. At every house the women
dance and sing, clashing castanets or cymbals of brass and
jingling bunches of little brass bells in both hands. When
the performance has been repeated at every house in the
village, the procession defiles down to the river and all the
evil spirits, which the performers have chased from the
houses, follow them to the edge of the water. There a raft
has been made ready and moored to the bank. It contains
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
offerings of food, cloth, cooking-pots, and swords; and the
deck is crowded with figures of men, women, animals, and
birds, all made out of the leaves of the sago palm. The
evil spirits now embark on the raft, and when they are all
aboard, it is pushed off and allowed to float down with the
current, carrying the demons with it. Should the raft run
aground near the village, it is shoved off with all speed, lest
the invisible passengers should seize the opportunity of
landing and returning to the village. Finally, the sufferings
of the little pig, whose squeals served to decoy the demons
from their lurking-places, are terminated by death, for it is
killed and its carcase thrown away.<note place='foot'>Ivor H. N. Evans, <q>Notes on the
Religious Beliefs, Superstitions, Ceremonies
and Tabus of the Dusuns of
the Tuaran and Tempassuk Districts,
British North Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xlii.
(1912) pp. 382-384.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
in little
ships in
the Nicobar
Islands.</note>
Every year, at the beginning of the dry season, the
Nicobar Islanders carry the model of a ship through their
villages. The devils are chased out of the huts, and driven
on board the little ship, which is then launched and suffered
to sail away with the wind.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 91.</note> The ceremony has been described
by a catechist, who witnessed it at Car Nicobar in
July 1897. For three days the people were busy preparing
two very large floating cars, shaped like canoes, fitted
with sails, and loaded with certain leaves, which possessed
the valuable property of expelling devils. While the young
people were thus engaged, the exorcists and the elders sat
in a house singing songs by turns; but often they would
come forth, pace the beach armed with rods, and forbid
the devil to enter the village. The fourth day of the
solemnity bore the name of <foreign rend='italic'>Intō-nga-Sĭya</foreign>, which means
<q>Expelling the Devil by Sails.</q> In the evening all the
villagers assembled, the women bringing baskets of ashes
and bunches of devil-expelling leaves. These leaves were
then distributed to everybody, old and young. When all
was ready, a band of robust men, attended by a guard of
exorcists, carried one of the cars down to the sea on the
right side of the village graveyard, and set it floating in the
water. As soon as they had returned, another band of men
carried the other car to the beach and floated it similarly in
the sea to the left of the graveyard. The demon-laden
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
barks being now launched, the women threw ashes from the
shore, and the whole crowd shouted, saying, <q>Fly away,
devil, fly away, never come again!</q> The wind and the tide
being favourable, the canoes sailed quickly away; and that
night all the people feasted together with great joy, because
the devil had departed in the direction of Chowra. A
similar expulsion of devils takes place once a year in other
Nicobar villages; but the ceremonies are held at different
times in different places.<note place='foot'>V. Solomon, <q>Extracts from
Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) pp. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of embodied
evils in
India,
China, and
Corea. Annual
expulsion
or destruction
of
demons
embodied
in images
in Tibet.</note>
At Sucla-Tirtha, in India, an earthen pot containing the
accumulated sins of the people is (annually?) set adrift on
the river. Legend says that the custom originated with a
wicked priest who, after atoning for his guilt by a course of
austerities and expiatory ceremonies, was directed to sail
upon the river in a boat with white sails. If the white sails
turned black, it would be a sign that his sins were forgiven
him. They did so, and he joyfully allowed the boat to drift
with his sins to sea.<note place='foot'>Captain F. Wilford, <q>An Essay
on the Sacred Isles in the West,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Asiatic Researches</hi>, ix. (London, 1809)
pp. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst many of the aboriginal
tribes of China, a great festival is celebrated in the third
month of every year. It is held by way of a general rejoicing
over what the people believe to be a total annihilation
of the ills of the past twelve months. The destruction is
supposed to be effected in the following way. A large
earthenware jar filled with gunpowder, stones, and bits of
iron is buried in the earth. A train of gunpowder, communicating
with the jar, is then laid; and a match being applied,
the jar and its contents are blown up. The stones and bits
of iron represent the ills and disasters of the past year, and
the dispersion of them by the explosion is believed to remove
the ills and disasters themselves. The festival is attended
with much revelling and drunkenness.<note place='foot'>J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi> (London, 1878),
ii. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On New Year's
Day people in Corea seek to rid themselves of all their
distresses by painting images on paper, writing against them
their troubles of body or mind, and afterwards giving the
papers to a boy to burn. Another method of effecting the
same object at the same season is to make rude dolls of
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
straw, stuff them with a few copper coins, and throw them
into the street. Whoever picks up such an effigy gets all
the troubles and thereby relieves the original sufferer.<note place='foot'>W. Woodville Rockhill, <q>Notes
on some of the Laws, Customs, and
Superstitions of Corea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The American
Anthropologist</hi>, iv. (1891) p. 185;
Mrs. Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea and her Neighbours</hi>
(London, 1898), ii. 56.</note>
Again, on the fourteenth day of the first month the Coreans
fly paper kites inscribed with a wish that all the ills of the
year may fly away with them.<note place='foot'>Stewart Culin, <hi rend='italic'>Korean Games</hi>
(Philadelphia, 1895), p. 12.</note> Mr. George Bogle, the English
envoy sent to Tibet by Warren Hastings, witnessed the
celebration of the Tibetan New Year's Day at Teshu Lumbo,
the capital of the Teshu Lama. Monks walked in procession
round the court to the music of cymbals, tabors, trumpets,
hautboys and drums. Then others, clad in masquerade dress
and wearing masks which represented the heads of animals,
mostly wild beasts, danced with antic motions. <q>After this,
the figure of a man, chalked upon paper, was laid upon the
ground. Many strange ceremonies, which to me who did not
understand them appeared whimsical, were performed about
it; and a great fire being kindled in a corner of the court, it
was at length held over it, and being formed of combustibles,
vanished with much smoke and explosion. I was told it
was a figure of the devil.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narratives of the Mission of George
Bogle to Tibet and of the Journey of
Thomas Manning to Lhasa</hi>, edited by
(Sir) Clements R. Markham (London,
1876), pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Sarat
Chandra Das, <hi rend='italic'>Journey to Lhasa and
Central Tibet</hi> (London, 1902), p. 116.</note> Another Tibetan mode of
expelling demons from a dwelling is to make a paste image,
into which the lamas by their incantations conjure all the
evil spirits that may be lurking in the house. This image
is carried to a distance by a runner and thrown away. He
is attended by men, who shout at the top of their voices,
brandish swords, and fire guns, all to frighten the demons
and drive them far from human habitations.<note place='foot'>Missionary Fage, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, xxix. (1857)
p. 321.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Biennial
expulsion
of demons
embodied
in effigies
at Old
Calabar.</note>
At Old Calabar on the coast of Guinea, the devils and
ghosts are, or used to be, publicly expelled once in two
years. Among the spirits thus driven from their haunts are
the souls of all the people who died since the last lustration
of the town. About three weeks or a month before the
expulsion, which according to one account takes place in
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
the month of November, rude effigies representing men and
animals, such as crocodiles, leopards, elephants, bullocks, and
birds, are made of wicker-work or wood, and being hung
with strips of cloth and bedizened with gew-gaws, are set
before the door of every house. About three o'clock in the
morning of the day appointed for the ceremony the whole
population turns out into the streets, and proceeds with a
deafening uproar and in a state of the wildest excitement
to drive all lurking devils and ghosts into the effigies, in
order that they may be banished with them from the abodes
of men. For this purpose bands of people roam through
the streets knocking on doors, firing guns, beating drums,
blowing on horns, ringing bells, clattering pots and pans,
shouting and hallooing with might and main, in short
making all the noise it is possible for them to raise. The
hubbub goes on till the approach of dawn, when it gradually
subsides and ceases altogether at sunrise. By this time the
houses have been thoroughly swept, and all the frightened
spirits are supposed to have huddled into the effigies or their
fluttering drapery. In these wicker figures are also deposited
the sweepings of the houses and the ashes of yesterday's
fires. Then the demon-laden images are hastily snatched
up, carried in tumultuous procession down to the brink of
the river, and thrown into the water to the tuck of drums.
The ebb-tide bears them away seaward, and thus the town
is swept clean of ghosts and devils for another two years. This
biennial expulsion of spirits goes by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>Ndok</foreign>, and the
effigies by which it is effected are called <foreign rend='italic'>Nabikem</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Nabikim</foreign>.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1858), p.
162; Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 105-107;
Hugh Goldie, <hi rend='italic'>Calabar and its
Mission</hi>, New Edition (Edinburgh and
London, 1901), pp. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Miss Mary
H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in West Africa</hi>
(London, 1897), p. 495; Major A. G.
Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower Niger and its
Tribes</hi> (London, 1906), pp. 449-451.
The ceremony takes place both in
Creek Town and Duke Town. The
date of it, according to Miss Kingsley,
is either every November or every
second November; but with the exception
of Mr. Macdonald, who does
not mention the period, the other
authorities agree in describing the
ceremony as biennial. According to
Major Leonard it is celebrated usually
towards the end of the year. Miss
Kingsley speaks of the effigies being
set up in the houses themselves; but
all the other writers say or imply that
they are set up at the doors of the
houses in the streets. According to
Mr. Goldie the spirits expelled are
<q>all the ghosts of those who have died
since the last lustration.</q> He makes
no mention of devils.</note>
</p>

<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of demons
embodied
in effigies
at Porto
Novo.</note>
Further to the west similar ceremonies are or were till
recently enacted at Porto Novo, the seaport of Dahomey.
One of them has been described by an eye-witness, a
Catholic missionary, who interpreted the rites as a Funeral
of Death. He says: <q>Some time ago a curious event took
place: the King had commanded to celebrate the funeral
of Death. Every year, at the season of the rains, the
predecessors of his sable Majesty, in order to preserve the
life of their dear subjects, had caused the fetish of that
terrible and pitiless enemy, who spares not even kings, to
be drowned in the lagoon. Toffa wished to comply with
the traditions of his ancestors.</q> However, the ceremony
as described by the missionary seems to conform closely to
the type of the expulsion of ghosts and demons. Two days
before the crowning act of the celebration the streets were
carefully swept and all the filth which usually encumbered
them was removed, <q>lest Death should there find a refuge.</q>
All the people from the neighbouring villages assembled; their
fetishes, daubed with red paint, were carried in great pomp
through the streets of the capital attended by noisy processions
of mummers. A great multitude passed the night
in the public square, drinking, singing, and shouting. Finally,
a number of rude and hideous effigies were escorted by a
noisy crowd to the shore of the lagoon; there canoes were
waiting to receive them and paddle them out to deep water,
where they were flung overboard. These effigies the
missionary regarded as so many images of Death, who thus
received his passport and was dismissed from the territory of
Porto Novo. But more probably they represented the hosts
of demons and ghosts who were believed to lurk about the
town and to massacre people under the form of sickness and
disease. Having made a clean sweep of the whole baleful
crew the inhabitants no doubt thought that they had
removed the principal, if not the only, cause of death, and
that accordingly they had taken out a new lease of life.<note place='foot'>Missionary F. Terrien, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</hi>, liv. (1882)
pp. 375-377.</note> It
is not without interest to observe that in cleansing their
streets the people did actually retrench one of the most fruitful
sources of disease and death, especially in the sweltering
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
heat of a damp tropical climate; hence the measures they
took for the prolongation of their lives were really to a
certain extent effectual, though they did not accomplish
their object in the precise way they imagined. So curiously
does it often happen that the savage reaches the goal of his
wishes by a road which to civilized man might appear at
first sight to lead far away from it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of embodied
evils
among the
Hos of
Togoland.</note>
Before the Hos of Togoland, to the west of Dahomey,
celebrate their festival of the new yams, which has been
described in another part of this work,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, ii. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> they say that it is
necessary to clean the town and to put it in order. The
way in which they do so is this. They take leaves of two
particular sorts of trees (the <foreign rend='italic'>adzu</foreign> and the <foreign rend='italic'>wo</foreign>), together with
creepers and ashes, and bind all the leaves fast to a pole of
the <foreign rend='italic'>adzu</foreign> tree. As they do so they pray or command the
evil spirits, the witches, and all other evils in the town to
enter into the band and be bound with it. Then they make
a paste out of the ashes mixed with urine and smear it on
the bundle of leaves, saying, <q>We smear it on the face of the
Evil Ones who are in this bundle, in order that they may
not be able to see any more.</q> Then they throw the bundle
on the ground and mock at it. Next they take all the
similar poles, wrapt in creepers, in which they have bound
up all the evil powers, and carry them out of the town and
stick them in the ground on the various roads leading into
the town. When they have done this, they say that they
have driven the evils out of the town and shut the door
against them. After that they wash the faces of all the
people with a medicine which has been prepared by the
oldest men. Thereupon they all return home to sweep out
their houses and yards; they sweep even the ground in
front of the yards, so that the whole town is thoroughly
clean. All the grass-stalks and refuse of stock-yams which
have been swept together are carried out of the town, and
the people rail at the stock-yams. In the course of the
night the oldest men assemble and tie a toad to a young
palm-leaf. They say that they wish now to sweep the town
and finish the ceremony. So they drag the toad behind
them through the whole town in the direction of Mount
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
Adaklu. When that has been done, the priests say that
they will now remove the sicknesses. In the evening they
give public notice that they are about to take to the road,
so nobody may light a fire on the hearth or eat. At dead
of night, when people are asleep, three men go through the
town. One of them drags behind them a toad fastened to
a bunch of herbs; another carries a calabash of holy herbs
and water, with which he sprinkles the streets; and the
third whistles softly. As soon as they have thus passed
through the whole town, they throw away the toad and the
holy herbs in the direction of Mount Adaklu. Next
morning the women sweep out their houses and hearths and
set the sweepings on broken wooden plates. Many put on
torn mats or torn clothes; others tie grasses and creepers
about them. While they do so, they pray, saying, <q>All ye
sicknesses which are in our body and plague us, we are
come this day to cast you out!</q> When they set out so to
do, the priest commands every man to cry out thrice and
thereby to smite himself on the mouth. In a moment they
all cry out, smite themselves on the mouth, and run as fast
as their legs can carry them in the direction of Mount
Adaklu. As they run, they say, <q>Out to-day! Out to-day!
What kills anybody, out to-day! Ye evil spirits, out
to-day! And all that makes our heads to ache, out to-day!
Anlo and Adaklu are the places whither all evil ought
to go.</q> Now on Mount Adaklu there stands a <foreign rend='italic'>klo</foreign> tree;
and when they have come thither they throw everything
away and return home. After their return every man
washes himself with the medicine which is set forth for that
purpose in the public street; then he goes into his house.
Such is the ceremony by which the Hos prepare themselves
to eat the new yams.<note place='foot'>Jakob Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 305-307. We
have seen (above, p. 193) that these
people used a toad as a scapegoat to
free them from the influenza.</note> Thus among the Hos the public
expulsion of evils is definitely connected with the crops and
therefore takes place every year, not every two years, as at
Old Calabar.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of embodied
evils
among the
gypsies.</note>
Similar annual expulsions of embodied evils are not
unknown in Europe. On the evening of Easter Sunday
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
the gypsies of Southern Europe take a wooden vessel like
a band-box, which rests cradle-wise on two cross pieces
of wood. In this they place herbs and simples, together
with the dried carcase of a snake, or lizard, which every
person present must first have touched with his fingers. The
vessel is then wrapt in white and red wool, carried by the
oldest man from tent to tent, and finally thrown into running
water, not, however, before every member of the band has
spat into it once, and the sorceress has uttered some spells
over it. They believe that by performing this ceremony they
dispel all the illnesses that would otherwise have afflicted
them in the course of the year; and that if any one finds
the vessel and opens it out of curiosity, he and his will be
visited by all the maladies which the others have escaped.<note place='foot'>H. von Wlislocki, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigeuner</hi> (Münster
i. W., 1891), pp. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of evils in
an animal
scapegoat
among the
Garos of
Assam.</note>
The scapegoat by means of which the accumulated ills of
a whole year are publicly expelled is sometimes an animal.
For example, among the Garos of Assam, <q>besides the
sacrifices for individual cases of illness, there are certain
ceremonies which are observed once a year by a whole
community or village, and are intended to safeguard its
members from dangers of the forest, and from sickness and
mishap during the coming twelve months. The principal of
these is the Asongtata ceremony. Close to the outskirts of
every big village a number of stones may be noticed stuck
into the ground, apparently without order or method. These
are known by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>asong</foreign>, and on them is offered the
sacrifice which the Asongtata demands. The sacrifice of a
goat takes place, and a month later, that of a <foreign rend='italic'>langur</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Entellus</foreign> monkey) or a bamboo-rat is considered necessary.
The animal chosen has a rope fastened round its neck and is
led by two men, one on each side of it, to every house in the
village. It is taken inside each house in turn, the assembled
villagers, meanwhile, beating the walls from the outside, to
frighten and drive out any evil spirits which may have taken
up their residence within. The round of the village having
been made in this manner, the monkey or rat is led to the
outskirts of the village, killed by a blow of a <foreign rend='italic'>dao</foreign>, which
disembowels it, and then crucified on bamboos set up in the
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
ground. Round the crucified animal long, sharp bamboo
stakes are placed, which form <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>chevaux de frise</foreign> round about it.
These commemorate the days when such defences surrounded
the villages on all sides to keep off human enemies, and they
are now a symbol to ward off sickness and dangers to life
from the wild animals of the forest. The <foreign rend='italic'>langur</foreign> required
for the purpose is hunted down some days before, but should
it be found impossible to catch one, a brown monkey may
take its place; a hulock may not be used.</q><note place='foot'>Major A. Playfair, <hi rend='italic'>The Garos</hi>
(London, 1909), p. 92.</note> Here the
crucified ape or rat is the public scapegoat, which by its
vicarious sufferings and death relieves the people from all
sickness and mishap in the coming year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dogs as
scapegoats
in India,
Scotland
and
America. The Jewish
scapegoat.</note>
Again, on one day of the year the Bhotiyas of Juhar, in the
Western Himalayas, take a dog, intoxicate him with spirits
and bhang or hemp, and having fed him with sweetmeats,
lead him round the village and let him loose. They then
chase and kill him with sticks and stones, and believe that,
when they have done so, no disease or misfortune will visit
the village during the year.<note place='foot'>E. T. Atkinson, <q>Notes on the
History of Religion in the Himalaya of
the North-West Provinces,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, liii. Pt. i.
(1884) p. 62; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Himalayan
Districts of the North-Western Provinces
of India</hi>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) p.
871.</note> In some parts of Breadalbane
it was formerly the custom on New Year's Day to take a
dog to the door, give him a bit of bread, and drive him out,
saying, <q>Get away, you dog! Whatever death of men or
loss of cattle would happen in this house to the end of the
present year, may it all light on your head!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth
Century</hi>, from the MSS. of John
Ramsay of Ochtertyre, edited by Alex.
Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), ii. 439.</note> It appears
that the white dogs annually sacrificed by the Iroquois
at their New Year Festival are, or have been, regarded
as scapegoats. According to Mr. J. V. H. Clark, who
witnessed the ceremony in January 1841, on the first day
of the festival all the fires in the village were extinguished,
the ashes scattered to the winds, and a new fire kindled
with flint and steel. On a subsequent day, men dressed in
fantastic costumes went round the village, gathering the sins
of the people. When the morning of the last day of the
festival was come, two white dogs, decorated with red paint,
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
wampum, feathers, and ribbons, were led out. They were soon
strangled, and hung on a ladder. Firing and yelling
succeeded, and half an hour later the animals were taken into
a house, <q>where the people's sins were transferred to them.</q>
The carcases were afterwards burnt on a pyre of wood.<note place='foot'>W. M. Beauchamp, <q>The Iroquois
White Dog Feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American Antiquarian</hi>,
vii. (1885) p. 237.</note>
According to the Rev. Mr. Kirkland, who wrote in the
eighteenth century, the ashes of the pyre upon which one of
the white dogs was burnt were carried through the village
and sprinkled at the door of every house.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 236; T. Dwight, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in New England and New York</hi>
(London, 1823), iv. 202.</note> Formerly,
however, as we have seen, the Iroquois expulsion of evils
was immediate and not by scapegoat.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</note> On the Day of
Atonement, which was the tenth day of the seventh month,
the Jewish high-priest laid both his hands on the head of a
live goat, confessed over it all the iniquities of the Children
of Israel, and, having thereby transferred the sins of the
people to the beast, sent it away into the wilderness.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xvi. The word translated
<q>scapegoat</q> in the Authorised
Version is Azazel, which appears rather
to be the name of a bad angel or demon,
to whom the goat was sent away.
<q>In later Jewish literature (Book of
Enoch) Azazel appears as the prince of
the fallen angels, the offspring of the
unions described in Gen. vi. 1 ff. The
familiar rendering <q>scapegoat,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
goat which is allowed to escape, goes
back to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caper emissarius</foreign> of the
Vulgate, and is based on an untenable
etymology</q> (Professor A. R. S.
Kennedy, in his commentary on
Leviticus xvi. 8, in the <hi rend='italic'>Century
Bible</hi>). There is some ground for
thinking that the animal was killed by
being thrown over a certain crag that
overhangs a rocky chasm not far from
Jerusalem. See <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopædia Biblica</hi>,
ed. T. K. Cheyne and J. S. Black,
vol. i. (London, 1899) coll. 394 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Azazel.</q> Modern Jews sacrifice
a white cock on the eve of the Day of
Atonement, nine days after the beginning
of their New Year. The father of
the family knocks the cock thrice
against his own head, saying, <q>Let
this cock be a substitute for me, let it
take my place, let death be laid upon
this cock, but a happy life bestowed on
me and on all Israel.</q> Then he cuts
its throat and dashes the bird violently
on the ground. The intestines are
thrown on the roof of the house. The
flesh of the cock was formerly given to
the poor. See J. Buxtorf, <hi rend='italic'>Synagoga
Judaica</hi> (Bâle, 1661), ch. xxv. pp.
508 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
scapegoats
formerly
put to
death every
year in
Africa.</note>
The scapegoat upon whom the sins of the people are
periodically laid, may also be a human being. At Onitsha,
on the Niger, two human beings used to be annually
sacrificed to take away the sins of the land. The victims
were purchased by public subscription. All persons who,
during the past year, had fallen into gross sins, such as
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
incendiarism, theft, adultery, witchcraft, and so forth, were
expected to contribute 28 <foreign rend='italic'>ngugas</foreign>, or a little over £2. The
money thus collected was taken into the interior of the
country and expended in the purchase of two sickly persons
<q>to be offered as a sacrifice for all these abominable crimes&mdash;one
for the land and one for the river.</q> A man from a
neighbouring town was hired to put them to death. On the
twenty-seventh of February 1858 the Rev. J. C. Taylor
witnessed the sacrifice of one of these victims. The sufferer
was a woman, about nineteen or twenty years of age. They
dragged her alive along the ground, face downwards, from
the king's house to the river, a distance of two miles, the
crowds who accompanied her crying, <q>Wickedness! wickedness!</q>
The intention was <q>to take away the iniquities of
the land. The body was dragged along in a merciless
manner, as if the weight of all their wickedness was thus
carried away.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>The
Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi> (London,
1859), pp. 343-345. Compare
J. F. Schön and S. Crowther, <hi rend='italic'>Journals</hi>
(London, 1848), pp. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
account of the custom by J. Africanus
B. Horton (<hi rend='italic'>West African Countries and
Peoples</hi>, pp. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) is taken entirely
from Taylor.</note> Similar customs are said to be still secretly
practised every year by many tribes on the delta of the
Niger in spite of the vigilance of the British Government.<note place='foot'>Major A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower
Niger and its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 446 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Among the Yoruba negroes of West Africa <q>the human
victim chosen for sacrifice, and who may be either a free-born
or a slave, a person of noble or wealthy parentage, or
one of humble birth, is, after he has been chosen and marked
out for the purpose, called an <foreign rend='italic'>Oluwo</foreign>. He is always well fed
and nourished and supplied with whatever he should desire
during the period of his confinement. When the occasion
arrives for him to be sacrificed and offered up, he is commonly
led about and paraded through the streets of the
town or city of the Sovereign who would sacrifice him for
the well-being of his government and of every family and
individual under it, in order that he might carry off the sin,
guilt, misfortune and death of all without exception. Ashes
and chalk would be employed to hide his identity by the one
being freely thrown over his head, and his face painted with
the latter, whilst individuals would often rush out of their
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
houses to lay their hands upon him that they might thus
transfer to him their sin, guilt, trouble, and death. This
parading done, he is taken through a temporary sacred shed
of palm and other tree branches, and especially of the former,
the Igbodu<note place='foot'>An Igbodu is a sacred grove in
which oracles are given. It is divided
into three compartments by fences of
palm branches and the <foreign rend='italic'>omu</foreign> shrub.
Into the first compartment women and
uninitiated men may enter; into the
other two only priestly officials are
permitted, according to their rank in
the hierarchy, to enter. See Bishop
James Johnson, <q>Yoruba Heathenism,</q>
quoted by R. E. Dennett, <hi rend='italic'>At the Back
of the Black Man's Mind</hi> (London,
1906), p. 254.</note> and to its first division, where many persons
might follow him, and through a second where only the
chiefs and other very important persons might escort and
accompany him to, and to a third where only the Babalawo
[priest] and his official assistant, the Ajigbona, are permitted
to enter with him. Here, after he himself has given out or
started his last song, which is to be taken up by the large
assembly of people who will have been waiting to hear his
last word or his last groan, his head is taken off and his
blood offered to the gods. The announcement of his last
word or his last groan heard and taken up by the people,
would be a signal for joy, gladness, and thanksgiving, and
for drum beating and dancing, as an expression of their
gratification because their sacrifice has been accepted, the
divine wrath is appeased, and the prospect of prosperity or
increased prosperity assured.</q><note place='foot'>Bishop James Johnson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
263. Bishop Johnson is a native
African. It does not appear whether
the sacrifice which he describes is
occasional or periodical.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
scapegoats
formerly
put to
death
every year
in Siam.
Annual
human
scapegoats
in Japan and Sumatra.</note>
In Siam it used to be the custom on one day of the
year to single out a woman broken down by debauchery,
and carry her on a litter through all the streets to the music
of drums and hautboys. The mob insulted her and pelted
her with dirt; and after having carried her through the
whole city, they threw her on a dunghill or a hedge of
thorns outside the ramparts, forbidding her ever to enter the
walls again. They believed that the woman thus drew upon
herself all the malign influences of the air and of evil spirits.<note place='foot'>Turpin, <q>History of Siam,</q> in
J. Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>
(London, 1808-1814), ix. 579.</note>
In Japan the <q><foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>tsuina</foreign> or <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>oni-yarahi</foreign>, that is to say, demon
expelling, is a sort of drama in which disease, or more generally
ill-luck, is personified, and driven away with threats
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
and a show of violence. Like the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>oho-harahi</foreign>,<note place='foot'>The <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>oho-harahi</foreign> or <q>Great Purification</q>
is a ceremony, which used to
be performed in the Japanese capital
twice every year, namely on the
last days of the sixth and twelfth
month. It included a preliminary
lustration, expiatory offerings, and the
recital of a <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>norito</foreign> or formula (not a
prayer), in which the Mikado, by
virtue of an authority transmitted to
him from the Sun-goddess, pronounced
to his ministers and people the absolution
and remission of their sins. See
W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (London, 1905),
pp. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The writer adds (p.
295): <q>The Chinese had an <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>oho-harahi</foreign>,
defined by Mr. Giles in his
<hi rend='italic'>Chinese Dictionary</hi> as <q>a religious
ceremony of purification performed in
spring and autumn, with a view to
secure divine protection for agricultural
interests.</q></q> The popular celebrations
of the first of May and the first of
November in Europe seem to be relics
of similar biennial purifications.</note> it was performed
on the last day of the year. This association is
only natural. The demons of the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>tsuina</foreign> are personified
wintry influences, with the diseases which they bring with
them, while the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>oho-harahi</foreign> is intended to cleanse the people
from sin and uncleanness, things closely related to disease,
as well as from disease itself. Though probably of Chinese
origin, the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>tsuina</foreign> is a tolerably ancient rite. It is alluded to
in the <hi rend='italic'>Nihongi</hi> under the date <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 689. It was at one time
performed at Court on an imposing scale. Four bands of
twenty youths, each wearing a four-eyed mask, and each
carrying a halberd in the left hand, marched simultaneously
from the four gates of the palace, driving the devils before
them. Another account of this ceremony says that a man
disguised himself as the demon of pestilence, in which garb
he was shot at and driven off by the courtiers armed with
peach-wood bows and arrows of reed. Peach-wood staves
were used for the same purpose. There was formerly a
practice at Asakusa in Tokio on the last day of the year for
a man got up as a devil to be chased round the pagoda
there by another wearing a mask. After this 3,000 tickets
were scrambled for by the spectators. These were carried
away and pasted up over the doors as a charm against pestilence.</q><note place='foot'>W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi>, pp. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Battas of Sumatra offer either a red horse or a
buffalo as a public sacrifice to purify the land and obtain the
favour of the gods. Formerly, it is said, a man was bound
to the same stake as the buffalo, and when they killed the
animal, the man was driven away; no one might receive
him, converse with him, or give him food.<note place='foot'>W. Ködding, <q>Die Batakschen
Götter und ihr Verhältnis zum Brahmanismus,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xii. (1885) pp. 476, 478.</note> Doubtless he
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
was supposed to carry away the sins and misfortunes of the
people.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
human
scapegoats
in Europe.
The
expulsion
of Posterli
in Switzerland.</note>
Human scapegoats, as we shall see presently, were well
known in classical antiquity, and even in mediæval Europe
the custom seems not to have been wholly extinct. In the
town of Halberstadt, in Thüringen, there was a church said to
have been founded by Charlemagne. In this church every
year they chose a man, who was believed to be stained with
heinous sins. On the first day of Lent he was brought to
the church, dressed in mourning garb, with his head muffled
up. At the close of the service he was turned out of the
church. During the forty days of Lent he perambulated
the city barefoot, neither entering the churches nor speaking
to any one. The canons took it in turn to feed him. After
midnight he was allowed to sleep in the streets. On the
day before Good Friday, after the consecration of the holy
oil, he was readmitted to the church and absolved from his
sins. The people gave him money. He was called Adam,
and was now believed to be in a state of innocence.<note place='foot'>Aeneas Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi> (Bâle, 1571),
pp. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At
Entlebuch, in Switzerland, down to the close of the eighteenth
century, the custom of annually expelling a scapegoat was
preserved in the ceremony of driving <q>Posterli</q> from the
village into the lands of the neighbouring village. <q>Posterli</q>
was represented by a lad disguised as an old witch or as a
goat or an ass. Amid a deafening noise of horns, clarionets,
bells, whips, and so forth, he was driven out. Sometimes
<q>Posterli</q> was represented by a puppet, which was drawn
on a sledge and left in a corner of the neighbouring village.
The ceremony took place on the Thursday evening of the
last week but one before Christmas.<note place='foot'>H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N.F., xxx. (1875)
p. 198; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv.
(Leipsic and Berlin, 1913) pp. 109
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The custom seems to have been
revived in the latter part of the
nineteenth century; perhaps it may
still be observed. See H. Herzog,
<hi rend='italic'>Schweizerische Volksfeste, Sitten und
Gebräuche</hi> (Aarau, 1884), pp. 293
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <hi rend='italic'>Feste und
Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</hi> (Zurich,
1913), p. 101.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual expulsion
of
the devil,
personified
by a man,
from
Munich on
Ascension
Day.</note>
In Munich down to about a hundred years ago the
expulsion of the devil from the city used to be annually
enacted on Ascension Day. On the Eve of Ascension Day
a man disguised as a devil was chased through the streets,
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
which were then narrow and dirty in contrast to the broad,
well-kept thoroughfares, lined with imposing buildings, which
now distinguish the capital of Bavaria. His pursuers were
dressed as witches and wizards and provided with the
indispensable crutches, brooms, and pitchforks which make
up the outfit of these uncanny beings. While the devil fled
before them, the troop of maskers made after him with wild
whoops and halloos, and when they overtook him they
ducked him in puddles or rolled him on dunghills. In this
way the demon at last succeeded in reaching the palace,
where he put off his hideous and now filthy disguise and was
rewarded for his vicarious sufferings by a copious meal. The
devilish costume which he had thrown off was then stuffed
with hay and straw and conveyed to a particular church (the
Frauenkirche), where it was kept over night, being hung by
a rope from a window in the tower. On the afternoon of
Ascension Day, before the Vesper service began, an image
of the Saviour was drawn up to the roof of the church, no
doubt to symbolize the event which the day commemorates.
Then burning tow and wafers were thrown on the people.
Meantime the effigy of the devil, painted black, with a pair
of horns and a lolling red tongue, had been dangling from
the church tower, to the delight of a gaping crowd of
spectators gathered before the church. It was now flung
down into their midst, and a fierce struggle for possession of
it took place among the rabble. Finally, it was carried out
of the town by the Isar gate and burned on a neighbouring
height, <q>in order that the foul fiend might do no harm to
the city.</q> The custom died out at Munich towards the end
of the eighteenth century; but it is said that similar
ceremonies are observed to this day in some villages of
Upper Bavaria.<note place='foot'>L. Curtius, <q>Christi Himmelfahrt,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
xiv. (1911) p. 307, quoting the
<hi rend='italic'>Münchener Neuesten Nachrichten</hi>, No.
235, May 21st, 1909.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
pardoned
criminal at
Rouen on
Ascension
Day may
have been
a public
scapegoat.</note>
This quaint ceremony suggests that the pardoned
criminal who used to play the principal part in a solemn
religious procession on Ascension Day at Rouen<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> may in
like manner have originally served, if not as a representative
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
of the devil, at least as a public scapegoat, who relieved the
whole people of their sins and sorrows for a year by taking
them upon himself. This would explain why the gaol had
to be raked in order to furnish one who would parade with
the highest ecclesiastical dignitaries in their gorgeous vestments
through the streets of Rouen, while the church bells
pealed out, the clergy chanted, banners waved, and every
circumstance combined to enhance the pomp and splendour
of the pageant. It would add a pathetic significance to the
crowning act of the ceremony, when on a lofty platform in
the public square, with the eyes of a great and silent
multitude turned upon him, the condemned malefactor
received from the Church the absolution and remission of his
sins; for if the rite is to be interpreted in the way here
suggested, the sins which were thus forgiven were those not
of one man only but of the whole people. No wonder, then,
that when the sinner, now a sinner no more, rose from his
knees and thrice lifted the silver shrine of St. Romain in his
arms, the whole vast assembly in the square broke out into
joyous cries of <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Noel! Noel! Noel!</foreign></q> which they understood
to signify, <q>God be with us!</q> In Christian countries no
more appropriate season could be selected for the ceremony
of the human scapegoat than Ascension Day, which commemorates
the departure from earth of Him who, in the
belief of millions, took away the sins of the world.<note place='foot'>On the use of eponymous magistrates
as annual scapegoats see above,
pp. <ref target='Pg039'>39-41</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Divine
animals as
scapegoats
in India
and ancient
Egypt.</note>
Sometimes the scapegoat is a divine animal. The
people of Malabar share the Hindoo reverence for the cow,
to kill and eat which <q>they esteem to be a crime as heinous
as homicide or wilful murder.</q> Nevertheless the <q>Bramans
transfer the sins of the people into one or more Cows, which
are then carry'd away, both the Cows and the Sins wherewith
these Beasts are charged, to what place the Braman
shall appoint.</q><note place='foot'>J. Thomas Phillips, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the
Religion, Manners, and Learning of the
People of Malabar</hi> (London, 1717), pp.
6, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the ancient Egyptians sacrificed a
bull, they invoked upon its head all the evils that might
otherwise befall themselves and the land of Egypt, and
thereupon they either sold the bull's head to the Greeks or
cast it into the river.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 39.</note> Now, it cannot be said that in the
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
times known to us the Egyptians worshipped bulls in
general, for they seem to have commonly killed and eaten
them.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 38-41; Sir J. Gardner
Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>, New Edition
(London, 1878), iii. 403 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But a good many circumstances point to the
conclusion that originally all cattle, bulls as well as cows,
were held sacred by the Egyptians. For not only were all
cows esteemed holy by them and never sacrificed, but even
bulls might not be sacrificed unless they had certain natural
marks; a priest examined every bull before it was sacrificed;
if it had the proper marks, he put his seal on the animal in
token that it might be sacrificed; and if a man sacrificed a
bull which had not been sealed, he was put to death. Moreover,
the worship of the black bulls Apis and Mnevis,
especially the former, played an important part in Egyptian
religion; all bulls that died a natural death were carefully
buried in the suburbs of the cities, and their bones were
afterwards collected from all parts of Egypt and interred in
a single spot; and at the sacrifice of a bull in the great
rites of Isis all the worshippers beat their breasts and
mourned.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> As to the worship
of sacred bulls in ancient Egypt, see
further <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, ii. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On the whole, then, we are perhaps entitled to
infer that bulls were originally, as cows were always,
esteemed sacred by the Egyptians, and that the slain bull
upon whose head they laid the misfortunes of the people
was once a divine scapegoat. It seems not improbable that
the lamb annually slain by the Madis of Central Africa is a
divine scapegoat, and the same supposition may partly
explain the Zuni sacrifice of the turtle.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, ii. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Divine men
as scapegoats
among the
Gonds of
India
and the
Albanians
of the
Caucasus.</note>
Lastly, the scapegoat may be a divine man. Thus, in
November the Gonds of India worship Ghansyam Deo, the
protector of the crops, and at the festival the god himself is
said to descend on the head of one of the worshippers, who
is suddenly seized with a kind of fit and, after staggering
about, rushes off into the jungle, where it is believed that, if
left to himself, he would die mad. However, they bring him
back, but he does not recover his senses for one or two days.
The people think that one man is thus singled out as a scapegoat
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
for the sins of the rest of the village.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. p.
54, § 335 (December, 1884).</note> In the temple
of the Moon the Albanians of the Eastern Caucasus kept a
number of sacred slaves, of whom many were inspired and
prophesied. When one of these men exhibited more than
usual symptoms of inspiration or insanity, and wandered
solitary up and down the woods, like the Gond in the jungle,
the high priest had him bound with a sacred chain and
maintained him in luxury for a year. At the end of the
year he was anointed with unguents and led forth to be
sacrificed. A man whose business it was to slay these
human victims and to whom practice had given dexterity,
advanced from the crowd and thrust a sacred spear into the
victim's side, piercing his heart. From the manner in which
the slain man fell, omens were drawn as to the welfare of
the commonwealth. Then the body was carried to a certain
spot where all the people stood upon it as a purificatory
ceremony.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xi. 4. 7, p. 503. For
the custom of standing upon a sacrificed
victim, compare Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi>
xxiii. 68, p. 642; Pausanias, iii.
20. 9.</note> This last circumstance clearly indicates that
the sins of the people were transferred to the victim, just as
the Jewish priest transferred the sins of the people to the
scapegoat by laying his hands on the animal's head; and
since the man was believed to be possessed by the divine
spirit, we have here an undoubted example of a man-god
slain to take away the sins and misfortunes of the
people.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
human
scapegoats
in Tibet.
The Jalno,
the temporary
ruler of
Lhasa.</note>
In Tibet the ceremony of the scapegoat presents some
remarkable features. The Tibetan new year begins with the
new moon which appears about the fifteenth of February.
For twenty-three days afterwards the government of Lhasa,
the capital, is taken out of the hands of the ordinary rulers
and entrusted to the monk of the Debang monastery who
offers to pay the highest sum for the privilege. The
successful bidder is called the Jalno, and he announces
his accession to power in person, going through the streets
of Lhasa with a silver stick in his hand. Monks from all
the neighbouring monasteries and temples assemble to pay
him homage. The Jalno exercises his authority in the most
arbitrary manner for his own benefit, as all the fines which
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
he exacts are his by purchase. The profit he makes is
about ten times the amount of the purchase money. His
men go about the streets in order to discover any conduct
on the part of the inhabitants that can be found fault with.
Every house in Lhasa is taxed at this time, and the slightest
offence is punished with unsparing rigour by fines. This
severity of the Jalno drives all working classes out of the
city till the twenty-three days are over. But if the laity
go out, the clergy come in. All the Buddhist monasteries
of the country for miles round about open their gates and
disgorge their inmates. All the roads that lead down into
Lhasa from the neighbouring mountains are full of monks
hurrying to the capital, some on foot, some on horseback,
some riding asses or lowing oxen, all carrying their prayer-books
and culinary utensils. In such multitudes do they
come that the streets and squares of the city are encumbered
with their swarms, and incarnadined with their red cloaks.
The disorder and confusion are indescribable. Bands of the
holy men traverse the streets chanting prayers or uttering
wild cries. They meet, they jostle, they quarrel, they fight;
bloody noses, black eyes, and broken heads are freely given
and received. All day long, too, from before the peep of
dawn till after darkness has fallen, these red-cloaked monks
hold services in the dim incense-laden air of the great
Machindranath temple, the cathedral of Lhasa; and thither
they crowd thrice a day to receive their doles of tea and
soup and money. The cathedral is a vast building, standing
in the centre of the city, and surrounded by bazaars and
shops. The idols in it are richly inlaid with gold and
precious stones.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Jalno
and the
King of the
Years. Expulsion
of the King
of the
Years.</note>
Twenty-four days after the Jalno has ceased to have
authority, he assumes it again, and for ten days acts in
the same arbitrary manner as before. On the first of the
ten days the priests again assemble at the cathedral,
pray to the gods to prevent sickness and other evils
among the people, <q>and, as a peace-offering, sacrifice one
man. The man is not killed purposely, but the ceremony
he undergoes often proves fatal.<note place='foot'>The ceremony referred to is perhaps the one performed on the tenth day,
as described in the text.</note> Grain is thrown against
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
his head, and his face is painted half white, half black.</q>
Thus grotesquely disguised, and carrying a coat of skin on
his arm, he is called the King of the Years, and sits daily in
the market-place, where he helps himself to whatever he
likes and goes about shaking a black yak's tail over the
people, who thus transfer their bad luck to him. On the
tenth day, all the troops in Lhasa march to the great
temple and form in line before it. The King of the Years
is brought forth from the temple and receives small
donations from the assembled multitude. He then ridicules
the Jalno, saying to him, <q>What we perceive through the
five senses is no illusion. All you teach is untrue,</q> and
the like. The Jalno, who represents the Grand Lama
for the time being, contests these heretical opinions; the
dispute waxes warm, and at last both agree to decide
the questions at issue by a cast of the dice, the Jalno
offering to change places with the scapegoat should the
throw be against him. If the King of the Years wins,
much evil is prognosticated; but if the Jalno wins, there
is great rejoicing, for it proves that his adversary has
been accepted by the gods as a victim to bear all the
sins of the people of Lhasa. Fortune, however, always
favours the Jalno, who throws sixes with unvarying success,
while his opponent turns up only ones. Nor is this so
extraordinary as at first sight it might appear; for the
Jalno's dice are marked with nothing but sixes and his
adversary's with nothing but ones. When he sees the finger
of Providence thus plainly pointed against him, the King of
the Years is terrified and flees away upon a white horse, with
a white dog, a white bird, salt, and so forth, which have all
been provided for him by the government. His face is still
painted half white and half black, and he still wears his
leathern coat. The whole populace pursues him, hooting,
yelling, and firing blank shots in volleys after him. Thus
driven out of the city, he is detained for seven days in the
great chamber of horrors at the Samyas monastery, surrounded
by monstrous and terrific images of devils and skins
of huge serpents and wild beasts. Thence he goes away
into the mountains of Chetang, where he has to remain
an outcast for several months or a year in a narrow den.
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
If he dies before the time is out, the people say it is an
auspicious omen; but if he survives, he may return to Lhasa
and play the part of scapegoat over again the following
year.<note place='foot'><q>Report of a Route Survey by
Pundit&mdash;from Nepal to Lhasa,</q> etc.,
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, xxxviii. (1868) pp. 167, 170
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <q>Four Years Journeying through
Great Tibet, by one of the Trans-Himalayan
Explorers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of
the Royal Geographical Society</hi>, N.S.
vii. (1885) pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Woodville
Rockhill, <q>Tibet, a Geographical,
Ethnographical, and Historical Sketch,
derived from Chinese Sources,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1891</hi>
(London, 1891), pp. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. A.
Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>The Buddhism of Tibet</hi>
(London, 1895), pp. 504 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 512
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. L. Dutreuil de Rhins, <hi rend='italic'>Mission
Scientifique dans la Haute Asie 1890-1895:
Récit du Voyage</hi> (Paris, 1897),
pp. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The accounts supplement
each other, though they differ in some
particulars. I have endeavoured to
combine them. According to Mr.
Rockhill's account, which is drawn
from Chinese sources, at one point of
the ceremonies the troops march thrice
round the temple and fire volleys of
musketry to drive away the devil.
With the like intent they discharge a
great old cannon, which bears the
inscription, <q>My power breaks up
and destroys rebellion.</q> The same
account speaks of a fencing with battle-axes
by a troop of boy-dancers, a
great illumination of the cathedral with
lanterns, and its decoration with figures
made out of butter and flour to represent
men, animals, dragons, etc.;
also it makes mention of a horse-race
and a foot-race, both run by boys.
The clerical invasion of the capital at
this season is graphically described by
an eye-witness. See Huc, <hi rend='italic'>Souvenirs
d'un Voyage dans la Tartarie et le
Thibet</hi>, Sixième Édition (Paris, 1878),
ii. 380 <hi rend='italic'>sq</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Grand
Lama, the
Jalno, and
the King of
the Years
in their
relations to
each other. Probability
that of old
the Tibetan
scapegoat
was put to
death as a
substitute
for the
Grand
Lama.</note>
This quaint ceremonial, still annually observed in the
secluded capital of Buddhism&mdash;the Rome of Asia&mdash;is
interesting because it exhibits, in a clearly marked religious
stratification, a series of divine redeemers themselves
redeemed, of vicarious sacrifices vicariously atoned for, of
gods undergoing a process of fossilization, who, while they
retain the privileges, have disburdened themselves of the
pains and penalties of divinity. In the Jalno we may
without undue straining discern a successor of those
temporary kings, those mortal gods, who purchase a short
lease of power and glory at the price of their lives. That
he is the temporary substitute of the Grand Lama is
certain; that he is, or was once, liable to act as scapegoat
for the people is made nearly certain by his offer to change
places with the real scapegoat&mdash;the King of the Years&mdash;if
the arbitrament of the dice should go against him. It is
true that the conditions under which the question is now put
to the hazard have reduced the offer to an idle form. But
such forms are no mere mushroom growths, springing up of
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
themselves in a night. If they are now lifeless formalities,
empty husks devoid of significance, we may be sure that
they once had a life and a meaning; if at the present day
they are blind alleys leading nowhere, we may be certain
that in former days they were paths that led somewhere, if
only to death. That death was the goal to which of old the
Tibetan scapegoat passed after his brief period of licence in
the market-place, is a conjecture that has much to commend
it. Analogy suggests it; the blank shots fired after him,
the statement that the ceremony often proves fatal, the
belief that his death is a happy omen, all confirm it. We
need not wonder then that the Jalno, after paying so dear to
act as deputy-deity for a few weeks, should have preferred to
die by deputy rather than in his own person when his time
was up. The painful but necessary duty was accordingly
laid on some poor devil, some social outcast, some wretch
with whom the world had gone hard, who readily agreed to
throw away his life at the end of a few days if only he
might have his fling in the meantime. For observe that
while the time allowed to the original deputy&mdash;the Jalno&mdash;was
measured by weeks, the time allowed to the deputy's
deputy was cut down to days, ten days according to one
authority, seven days according to another. So short a rope
was doubtless thought a long enough tether for so black or
sickly a sheep; so few sands in the hour-glass, slipping so
fast away, sufficed for one who had wasted so many precious
years. Hence in the jack-pudding who now masquerades
with motley countenance in the market-place of Lhasa,
sweeping up misfortune with a black yak's tail, we may
fairly see the substitute of a substitute, the vicar of a vicar,
the proxy on whose back the heavy burden was laid when
it had been lifted from nobler shoulders. But the clue, if
we have followed it aright, does not stop at the Jalno; it
leads straight back to the pope of Lhasa himself, the Grand
Lama, of whom the Jalno is merely the temporary vicar.
The analogy of many customs in many lands points to the
conclusion that, if this human divinity stoops to resign his
ghostly power for a time into the hands of a substitute, it is,
or rather was once, for no other reason than that the substitute
might die in his stead. Thus through the mist of
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
ages unillumined by the lamp of history, the tragic figure
of the pope of Buddhism&mdash;God's vicar on earth for Asia&mdash;looms
dim and sad as the man-god who bore his people's
sorrows, the Good Shepherd who laid down his life for
the sheep.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. On Scapegoats in General.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General
remarks.</note>
The foregoing survey of the custom of publicly expelling
the accumulated evils of a village or town or country suggests
a few general observations.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>First, the
immediate
and the
mediate
expulsions
of evil are
identical in
intention.</note>
In the first place, it will not be disputed that what
I have called the immediate and the mediate expulsions
of evil are identical in intention; in other words, that
whether the evils are conceived of as invisible or as
embodied in a material form, is a circumstance entirely
subordinate to the main object of the ceremony, which
is simply to effect a total clearance of all the ills that
have been infesting a people. If any link were wanting to
connect the two kinds of expulsion, it would be furnished by
such a practice as that of sending the evils away in a litter
or a boat. For here, on the one hand, the evils are invisible
and intangible; and, on the other hand, there is a visible
and tangible vehicle to convey them away. And a scapegoat
is nothing more than such a vehicle.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Second,
the annual
expulsion
of evil
generally
coincides
with some
well-marked
change of
season,
such as the
beginning
or end of
winter, the
beginning
or end of
the rainy
season, etc.</note>
In the second place, when a general clearance of evils is
resorted to periodically, the interval between the celebrations
of the ceremony is commonly a year, and the time of year
when the ceremony takes place usually coincides with some
well-marked change of season, such as the beginning or end
of winter in the arctic and temperate zones, and the beginning
or end of the rainy season in the tropics. The increased
mortality which such climatic changes are apt to produce,
especially amongst ill-fed, ill-clothed, and ill-housed savages,
is set down by primitive man to the agency of demons, who
must accordingly be expelled. Hence, in the tropical regions
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
of New Britain and Peru, the devils are or were driven out
at the beginning of the rainy season; hence, on the dreary
coasts of Baffin Land, they are banished at the approach of
the bitter arctic winter. When a tribe has taken to husbandry,
the time for the general expulsion of devils is
naturally made to agree with one of the great epochs of the
agricultural year, as sowing, or harvest; but, as these epochs
themselves naturally coincide with changes of season, it does
not follow that the transition from the hunting or pastoral
to the agricultural life involves any alteration in the time of
celebrating this great annual rite. Some of the agricultural
communities of India and the Hindoo Koosh, as we have
seen, hold their general clearance of demons at harvest,
others at sowing-time. But, at whatever season of the year
it is held, the general expulsion of devils commonly marks
the beginning of the new year. For, before entering on a
new year, people are anxious to rid themselves of the troubles
that have harassed them in the past; hence it comes about
that in so many communities the beginning of the new year
is inaugurated with a solemn and public banishment of evil
spirits.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Third,
the annual
expulsion
of evil is
commonly
preceded or
followed by
a period of
general
license.</note>
In the third place, it is to be observed that this public
and periodic expulsion of devils is commonly preceded or
followed by a period of general license, during which the
ordinary restraints of society are thrown aside, and all
offences, short of the gravest, are allowed to pass unpunished.
In Guinea and Tonquin the period of license precedes the
public expulsion of demons; and the suspension of the
ordinary government in Lhasa previous to the expulsion of
the scapegoat is perhaps a relic of a similar period of universal
license. Amongst the Hos of India the period of license
follows the expulsion of the devil. Amongst the Iroquois it
hardly appears whether it preceded or followed the banishment
of evils. In any case, the extraordinary relaxation of
all ordinary rules of conduct on such occasions is doubtless
to be explained by the general clearance of evils which precedes
or follows it. On the one hand, when a general riddance
of evil and absolution from all sin is in immediate
prospect, men are encouraged to give the rein to their
passions, trusting that the coming ceremony will wipe out
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
the score which they are running up so fast. On the other
hand, when the ceremony has just taken place, men's minds
are freed from the oppressive sense, under which they
generally labour, of an atmosphere surcharged with devils;
and in the first revulsion of joy they overleap the limits
commonly imposed by custom and morality. When the
ceremony takes place at harvest-time, the elation of feeling
which it excites is further stimulated by the state of physical
wellbeing produced by an abundant supply of food.<note place='foot'>In the Dassera festival, as celebrated
in Nepaul, we seem to have
another instance of the annual expulsion
of demons preceded by a time of
license. The festival occurs at the
beginning of October and lasts ten
days. <q>During its continuance there
is a general holiday among all classes
of the people. The city of Kathmandu
at this time is required to be purified,
but the purification is effected rather by
prayer than by water-cleansing. All
the courts of law are closed, and all
prisoners in jail are removed from
the precincts of the city.... The
Kalendar is cleared, or there is a jail-delivery
always at the Dassera of all
prisoners.</q> This seems a trace of a
period of license. At this time <q>it is
a general custom for masters to make
an annual present, either of money,
clothes, buffaloes, goats, etc., to such
servants as have given satisfaction
during the past year. It is in this
respect, as well as in the feasting and
drinking which goes on, something like
our <q>boxing-time</q> at Christmas.</q> On
the seventh day at sunset there is a
parade of all the troops in the capital,
including the artillery. At a given
signal the regiments begin to fire, the
artillery takes it up, and a general
firing goes on for about twenty minutes,
when it suddenly ceases. This probably
represents the expulsion of the
demons. <q>The grand cutting of the
rice-crops is always postponed till the
Dassera is over, and commences all
over the valley the very day afterwards.</q>
See the description of the festival in
H. A. Oldfield's <hi rend='italic'>Sketches from Nipal</hi>
(London, 1880), ii. 342-351. On the
Dassera in India, see J. A. Dubois,
<hi rend='italic'>Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des
Peuples de l'Inde</hi> (Paris, 1825), ii. 329
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The Besisi of the Malay Peninsula
hold a regular carnival at the end
of the rice-harvest, when they are said
to be allowed to exchange wives. See
W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden,
<hi rend='italic'>Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</hi>
(London, 1906), ii. 70, 76, 145, compare
120 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Amongst the Swahili
of East Africa New Year's Day was
formerly a day of general license,
<q>every man did as he pleased. Old
quarrels were settled, men were found
dead on the following day, and no inquiry
was instituted about the matter.</q>
See Ch. New, <hi rend='italic'>Life, Wanderings, and
Labours in Eastern Africa</hi> (London,
1873), p. 65; and <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
iii. 250. An annual period of anarchy
and license, lasting three days, is reported
by Borelli to be observed by
some of the Gallas. See Ph. Paulitschke,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas:
die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla
und Somal</hi> (Berlin, 1896), p. 158. In
Ashantee the annual festival of the new
yams is a time of general license. See
<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>,
ii. 62.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fourth,
the use of a
divine man
or animal
as a scapegoat
is remarkable.</note>
Fourthly, the employment of a divine man or animal as
a scapegoat is especially to be noted; indeed, we are here
directly concerned with the custom of banishing evils only in
so far as these evils are believed to be transferred to a god who
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
is afterwards slain. It may be suspected that the custom of
employing a divine man or animal as a public scapegoat is
much more widely diffused than appears from the examples
cited. For, as has already been pointed out, the custom of
killing a god dates from so early a period of human history
that in later ages, even when the custom continues to be
practised, it is liable to be misinterpreted. The divine
character of the animal or man is forgotten, and he comes
to be regarded merely as an ordinary victim. This is
especially likely to be the case when it is a divine man who
is killed. For when a nation becomes civilized, if it does
not drop human sacrifices altogether, it at least selects as
victims only such wretches as would be put to death at
any rate. Thus the killing of a god may sometimes come
to be confounded with the execution of a criminal.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Why a
dying god
should
serve as a
scapegoat.</note>
If we ask why a dying god should be chosen to take
upon himself and carry away the sins and sorrows of the
people, it may be suggested that in the practice of using the
divinity as a scapegoat we have a combination of two
customs which were at one time distinct and independent.
On the one hand we have seen that it has been customary
to kill the human or animal god in order to save his divine
life from being weakened by the inroads of age. On the
other hand we have seen that it has been customary to have
a general expulsion of evils and sins once a year. Now, if
it occurred to people to combine these two customs, the
result would be the employment of the dying god as a scapegoat.
He was killed, not originally to take away sin, but to
save the divine life from the degeneracy of old age; but,
since he had to be killed at any rate, people may have
thought that they might as well seize the opportunity to lay
upon him the burden of their sufferings and sins, in order
that he might bear it away with him to the unknown world
beyond the grave.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The use of
a divinity as
scapegoat
explains an
ambiguity
in the
ceremony
of <q>Carrying
out
Death.</q></note>
The use of the divinity as a scapegoat clears up the
ambiguity which, as we saw, appears to hang about the
European folk-custom of <q>carrying out Death.</q><note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 264.</note> Grounds
have been shewn for believing that in this ceremony the
so-called Death was originally the spirit of vegetation, who
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
was annually slain in spring, in order that he might come to
life again with all the vigour of youth. But, as I pointed
out, there are certain features in the ceremony which are not
explicable on this hypothesis alone. Such are the marks of
joy with which the effigy of Death is carried out to be buried
or burnt, and the fear and abhorrence of it manifested by the
bearers. But these features become at once intelligible if we
suppose that the Death was not merely the dying god of
vegetation, but also a public scapegoat, upon whom were
laid all the evils that had afflicted the people during the past
year. Joy on such an occasion is natural and appropriate;
and if the dying god appears to be the object of that fear
and abhorrence which are properly due not to himself, but to
the sins and misfortunes with which he is laden, this arises
merely from the difficulty of distinguishing, or at least of
marking the distinction, between the bearer and the burden.
When the burden is of a baleful character, the bearer of it
will be feared and shunned just as much as if he were himself
instinct with those dangerous properties of which, as it
happens, he is only the vehicle. Similarly we have seen that
disease-laden and sin-laden boats are dreaded and shunned
by East Indian peoples.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>.</note> Again, the view that in these
popular customs the Death is a scapegoat as well as a representative
of the divine spirit of vegetation derives some
support from the circumstance that its expulsion is always
celebrated in spring and chiefly by Slavonic peoples. For
the Slavonic year began in spring;<note place='foot'>H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N.F. (1875)
xxx. 194; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv.
(Leipsic and Berlin, 1913) p. 105.</note> and thus, in one of its
aspects, the ceremony of <q>carrying out Death</q> would be
an example of the widespread custom of expelling the
accumulated evils of the old year before entering on a
new one.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Human Scapegoats in Classical Antiquity.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Rome.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Rome.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
expulsion
of <q>the
Old Mars</q>
in the
month of
March in
ancient
Rome.</note>
We are now prepared to notice the use of the human scapegoat
in classical antiquity. Every year on the fourteenth of
March a man clad in skins was led in procession through the
streets of Rome, beaten with long white rods, and driven out
of the city. He was called Mamurius Veturius,<note place='foot'>Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iii.
29, iv. 36. Lydus places the expulsion
on the Ides of March, that is 15th
March. But this seems to be a mistake.
See H. Usener, <q>Italische
Mythen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, xxx.
(1875) pp. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine
Schriften</hi>, iv. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1913)
pp. 122 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Again, Lydus does not
expressly say that Mamurius Veturius
was driven out of the city, but he
implies it by mentioning the legend
that his mythical prototype was beaten
with rods and expelled the city.
Lastly, Lydus only mentions the name
Mamurius. But the full name Mamurius
Veturius is preserved by Varro,
<hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, vi. 45; Festus,
ed. C. O. Müller, p. 131; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>, 13. Mr. W. Warde Fowler
is disposed to be sceptical as to the
antiquity of the ceremony of expelling
Mamurius. See his <hi rend='italic'>Roman Festivals
of the period of the Republic</hi> (London,
1899), pp. 44-50.</note> that is, <q>the
old Mars,</q><note place='foot'>H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
pp. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv.
125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Apollon und
Mars</hi> (Leipsic, 1873), p. 27; L. Preller,
<hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1881-1883),
i. 360; A. Vaniček, <hi rend='italic'>Griechisch-lateinisches
etymologisches Wörterbuch</hi>
(Leipsic, 1877), p. 715. The three
latter scholars take Veturius as =
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>annuus</foreign>, because <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vetus</foreign> is etymologically
equivalent to ἔτος. But, as Usener
argues, it seems quite unallowable to
take the Greek meaning of the word
instead of the Latin.</note> and as the ceremony took place on the day preceding
the first full moon of the old Roman year (which began on
the first of March), the skin-clad man must have represented
the Mars of the past year, who was driven out at the beginning
of a new one. Now Mars was originally not a god of
war but of vegetation. For it was to Mars that the Roman
husbandman prayed for the prosperity of his corn and his
vines, his fruit-trees and his copses;<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cultura</hi>, 141.</note> it was to Mars that the
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
priestly college of the Arval Brothers, whose business it was
to sacrifice for the growth of the crops,<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, v. 85.</note> addressed their
petitions almost exclusively;<note place='foot'>See the song of the Arval Brothers
in <hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>, ed. G.
Henzen (Berlin, 1874), pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. Wordsworth, <hi rend='italic'>Fragments and Specimens
of Early Latin</hi> (Oxford, 1874),
p. 158; H. Dessau, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones
Latinae Selectae</hi>, ii. Pars i. (Berlin,
1902) p. 276.</note> and it was to Mars, as we
saw,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>,
ii. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> that a horse was sacrificed in October to secure an
abundant harvest. Moreover, it was to Mars, under his title
of <q>Mars of the woods</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mars Silvanus</foreign>), that farmers offered
sacrifice for the welfare of their cattle.<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cultura</hi>, 83.</note> We have already
seen that cattle are commonly supposed to be under the
special patronage of tree-gods.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 55, 124 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Once more, the consecration
of the vernal month of March to Mars seems to point him
out as the deity of the sprouting vegetation. Thus the
Roman custom of expelling the old Mars at the beginning
of the new year in spring is identical with the Slavonic
custom of <q>carrying out Death,</q> if the view here taken of the
latter custom is correct. The similarity of the Roman and
Slavonic customs has been already remarked by scholars,
who appear, however, to have taken Mamurius Veturius and
the corresponding figures in the Slavonic ceremonies to be
representatives of the old year rather than of the old god of
vegetation.<note place='foot'>L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 360; W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Apollon und
Mars</hi>, p. 49; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech.
und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 2408 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H.
Usener, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> The ceremony also
closely resembles the Highland New
Year ceremony already described. See
<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, ii.
322 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It is possible that ceremonies of this kind may
have come to be thus interpreted in later times even by the
people who practised them. But the personification of a
period of time is too abstract an idea to be primitive.<note place='foot'>But the Biyârs, a mixed tribe of
North-Western India, observe an annual
ceremony which they call <q>burning
the old year.</q> The old year is
represented by a stake of the wood of
the cotton-tree, which is planted in the
ground at an appointed place outside
of the village, and then burned on the
day of the full moon in the month of
Pûs. Fire is first put to it by the village
priest, and then all the people follow
his example, parch stalks of barley
in the fire, and afterwards eat them.
Next day they throw the ashes of the
burnt wood in the air; and on the
morrow the festival ends with a regular
saturnalia, at which decency and order
are forgotten. See W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes
and Castes of the North-Western Provinces
and Oudh</hi> (Calcutta, 1896), ii.
137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion
and Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 319.</note>
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
However, in the Roman, as in the Slavonic, ceremony, the
representative of the god appears to have been treated not
only as a deity of vegetation but also as a scapegoat. His
expulsion implies this; for there is no reason why the god
of vegetation, as such, should be expelled the city. But it is
otherwise if he is also a scapegoat; it then becomes necessary
to drive him beyond the boundaries, that he may carry
his sorrowful burden away to other lands. And, in fact,
Mamurius Veturius appears to have been driven away to
the land of the Oscans, the enemies of Rome.<note place='foot'>Propertius, v. 2. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H.
Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q> p. 210;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv. 123.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><q>The
Old Mars</q>
seems to
have been
beaten
by the
Salii, the
dancing
priests of
Mars. The
dances of
the Salii in
spring and
autumn
were
perhaps
intended to
quicken
the growth
of the
corn sown
at these
seasons. The armed
processions
of the Salii
may have
been intended
to
rout out
and expel
the demons
lurking in
the city.</note>
The blows with which the <q>old Mars</q> was expelled the
city seem to have been administered by the dancing priests
of Mars, the Salii. At least we know that in their songs
these priests made mention of Mamurius Veturius;<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, vi. 45
ed. C. O. Müller; Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Mamuri
Veturi,</q> p. 131 ed. C. O. Müller;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 389 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>, 13.</note> and we
are told that on a day dedicated to him they beat a hide
with rods.<note place='foot'>Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vii. 188,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cui [scil. Mamurio] et diem consecrarunt,
quo pellem virgis feriunt</foreign></q>;
Minucius Felix, <hi rend='italic'>Octavius</hi>, 24, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nudi
cruda hieme discurrunt, alii incedunt
pilleati, scuta vetera circumferunt, pelles
caedunt</foreign>.</q> Neither Servius nor Minucius
Felix expressly mentions the Salii, but
the description given by the latter writer
(<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pilleati, scuta vetera circumferunt</foreign></q>)
proves that he alludes to them. The
expression of Minucius Felix <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pelles
caedunt</foreign> is conclusive in favour of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pellem</foreign> in the passage of Servius, where
some would wrongly substitute <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peltam</foreign>,
the reading of a single MS. That the
beating of the skin-clad representative
of Mamurius was done by the Salii was
long ago rightly pointed out by Dr.
W. H. Roscher (<hi rend='italic'>Apollon und Mars</hi>,
p. 49).</note> It is therefore highly probable that the hide
which they drubbed on that day was the one worn by the
representative of the deity whose name they simultaneously
chanted. Thus on the fourteenth day of March every year
Rome witnessed the curious spectacle of the human incarnation
of a god chased by the god's own priests with blows
from the city. The rite becomes at least intelligible on the
theory that the man so beaten and expelled stood for the
outworn deity of vegetation, who had to be replaced by a
fresh and vigorous young divinity at the beginning of a
New Year, when everywhere around in field and meadow, in
wood and thicket the vernal flowers, the sprouting grass, and
the opening buds and blossoms testified to the stirring of
new life in nature after the long torpor and stagnation of
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
winter. The dancing priests of the god derived their
name of Salii from the leaps or dances which they were
bound to execute as a solemn religious ceremony every
year in the Comitium, the centre of Roman political life.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, v. 85,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Saliia salitando, quod facere in comitio
in sacris quotannis et solent et debent</foreign>.</q>
Compare Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 387, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iam
dederat Saliis a saltu nomina dicta</foreign></q>;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>, 13; Dionysius Halicarnasensis,
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquitates Romanae</hi>, ii.
70.</note>
Twice a year, in the spring month of March and the autumn
month of October, they discharged this sacred duty;<note place='foot'>J. Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>,
iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1885) p. 431;
G. Wissowa, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der
Römer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Munich, 1912), p. 144; W.
Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious Experience
of the Roman People</hi> (London,
1911), pp. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and
as they did so they invoked Saturn, the Roman god of
sowing.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. C. O. Müller, p. 325,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui deus in saliaribus Saturnus
nominatur, videlicet a sationibus</foreign>.</q> In
this passage Ritschl reads <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Saeturnus</foreign>
for <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Saturnus</foreign>. The best MSS. of the
epitome read <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sateurnus</foreign>. See J. Wordsworth,
<hi rend='italic'>Fragments and Specimens of
Early Latin</hi> (Oxford, 1884), p. 405.
As to Saturn in this capacity see below,
p. 306.</note> As the Romans sowed the corn both in spring
and autumn,<note place='foot'>Columella, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, ii. 9.
6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and as down to the present time in Europe
superstitious rustics are wont to dance and leap high in
spring for the purpose of making the crops grow high,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> we
may conjecture that the leaps and dances performed by the
Salii, the priests of the old Italian god of vegetation, were
similarly supposed to quicken the growth of the corn by
homoeopathic or imitative magic. The Salii were not limited
to Rome; similar colleges of dancing priests are known to
have existed in many towns of ancient Italy;<note place='foot'>J. Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>,
iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1885) pp. 427
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> everywhere,
we may conjecture, they were supposed to contribute to the
fertility of the earth by their leaps and dances. At Rome
they were divided into two colleges, each composed of twelve
members; and it is not impossible that the number twelve
was fixed with reference to the twelve months of the old
lunar year;<note place='foot'>L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 359. As to the
lunar year of the old Roman Calendar
see L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>
(Berlin, 1825-1826), ii. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> the <hi rend='italic'>Fratres Arvales</hi>, or <q>Brethren of the Ploughed
Fields,</q> another Roman college of priests, whose functions
were purely agricultural, and who wore as a badge of their
office a wreath of corn-ears, were also twelve in number,
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
perhaps for a similar reason.<note place='foot'>As to their number and badge see
Aulus Gellius, vi. (vii., ed. M. Hertz)
7. 8; as to their function see Varro,
<hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, v. 85, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres
Arvales dicti sunt, qui sacra publica
faciunt propterea ut fruges ferant arva,
a ferendo et arvis fratres arvales dicti</foreign>.</q></note> Nor was the martial equipment
of the Salii so alien to this peaceful function as a
modern reader might naturally suppose. Each of them
wore on his head a peaked helmet of bronze, and at his side
a sword; on his left arm he carried a shield of a peculiar
shape, and in his right hand he wielded a staff with which
he smote on the shield till it rang again.<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 20. 4; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>,
13; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquitates
Romanae</hi>, ii. 70. Livy only
mentions the shields. From an ancient
relief we learn that the staves of the
Salii terminated in a knob at each end.
Hence we may correct the statement
of Dionysius, who describes the weapon
doubtfully as λόγχην ἣ ῥάβδον ἤ τι
τοιοῦθ ἕτερον. See J. Marquardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 432,
note 6.</note> Such weapons in
priestly hands may be turned against spiritual foes; in the
preceding pages we have met with many examples of the
use of material arms to rout the host of demons who oppress
the imagination of primitive man, and we have seen that the
clash and clangour of metal is often deemed particularly
effective in putting these baleful beings to flight.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>,
<ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>,
<ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>,
<ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</note> May it
not have been so with the martial priests of Mars? We
know that they paraded the city for days together in a
regular order, taking up their quarters for the night at a
different place each day; and as they went they danced in
triple time, singing and clashing on their shields and taking
their time from a fugleman, who skipped and postured at
their head.<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 20. 4; J. Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 432 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary
of Greek and Roman Antiquities</hi>,
Third Edition (London, 1891), vol. ii.
p. 590, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Salii.</q></note> We may conjecture that in so doing they were
supposed to be expelling the powers of evil which had
accumulated during the preceding year or six months, and
which the people pictured to themselves in the form of
demons lurking in the houses, temples, and the other edifices
of the city. In savage communities such tumultuous and
noisy processions often parade the village for a similar purpose.
Similarly, we have seen that among the Iroquois men
in fantastic costume used to go about collecting the sins of
the people as a preliminary to transferring them to the
scapegoat dogs; and we have met with many examples of
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
armed men rushing about the streets and houses to drive
out demons and evils of all kinds.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Why should it not have
been so also in ancient Rome? The religion of the old
Romans is full of relics of savagery.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
demons
expelled
by the Salii
may have
been above
all the
demons of
blight and
infertility.
This conjecture
is
supported
by analogous
ceremonies
performed
by savages
for the purpose
of
driving off
the demons
that would
harm the
crops.</note>
If there is any truth in this conjecture, we may suppose
that, as priests of a god who manifested his power in the
vegetation of spring, the Salii turned their attention above
all to the demons of blight and infertility, who might be
thought by their maleficent activity to counteract the genial
influence of the kindly god and to endanger the farmer's
prospects in the coming summer or winter. The conjecture
may be supported by analogies drawn from the customs of
modern European peasants as well as of savages. Thus, to
begin with savages, we have seen that at the time of sowing
the Khonds drive out the <q>evil spirits, spoilers of the seed</q>
from every house in the village, the expulsion being effected
by young men who beat each other and strike the air
violently with long sticks.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</note> If I am right in connecting the
vernal and the autumnal processions of the Salii with the
vernal and the autumnal sowing, the analogy between the
Khond and the Roman customs would be very close. In
West Africa the fields of the King of Whydah, according to
an old French traveller, <q>are hoed and sowed before any of
his subjects has leave to hoe and sow a foot of his own
lands. These labours are performed thrice a year. The
chiefs lead their people before the king's palace at daybreak,
and there they sing and dance for a full quarter of an hour.
Half of these people are armed as in a day of battle, the
other half have only their farm tools. They go all together
singing and dancing to the scene of their labours, and there,
keeping time to the sound of the instruments, they work
with such speed and neatness that it is a pleasure to behold.
At the end of the day they return and dance before the
king's palace. This exercise refreshes them and does them
more good than all the repose they could take.</q><note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage du Chevalier Des
Marchais en Guinée, Isles voisines, et
à Cayenne</hi> (Amsterdam, 1731), ii. 80
(p. 99 of the Paris edition).</note> From
this account we might infer that the dancing was merely a
recreation of the field-labourers, and that the music of the
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
band had no other object than to animate them in their
work by enabling them to ply their mattocks in time to its
stirring strains. But this inference, though it seems to have
been drawn by the traveller who has furnished the account,
would probably be erroneous. For if half of the men were
armed as for war, what were they doing in the fields all the
time that the others were digging? A clue to unravel the
mystery is furnished by the description which a later French
traveller gives of a similar scene witnessed by him near
Timbo in French Guinea. He saw some natives at work
preparing the ground for sowing. <q>It is a very curious
spectacle: fifty or sixty blacks in a line, with bent backs, are
smiting the earth simultaneously with their little iron tools,
which gleam in the sun. Ten paces in front of them, marching
backwards, the women sing a well marked air, clapping
their hands as for a dance, and the hoes keep time to the
song. Between the workers and the singers a man runs and
dances, crouching on his hams like a clown, while he whirls
about his musket and performs other manœuvres with it.
Two others dance, also pirouetting and smiting the earth
here and there with their little hoe. All that is necessary
for exorcising the spirits and causing the grain to sprout.</q><note place='foot'>Olivier de Sanderval, <hi rend='italic'>De l'Atlantique
au Niger par le Foutah-Djallon</hi>
(Paris, 1883), p. 230. The phrase
which I have translated <q>for exorcising
the spirits</q> is <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>pour conjurer les
esprits</foreign>.</q></note>
Here, while the song of the women gives the time to the
strokes of the hoes, the dances and other antics of the armed
man and his colleagues are intended to exorcise or ward off
the spirits who might interfere with the diggers and so
prevent the grain from sprouting.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dances
of masked
men in
India,
Borneo,
and South
America to
promote
the growth
of the
crops.</note>
Again, an old traveller in southern India tells us that
<q>the men of Calicut, when they wish to sow rice, observe
this practice. First, they plough the land with oxen as we
do, and when they sow the rice in the field they have all the
instruments of the city continually sounding and making
merry. They also have ten or twelve men clothed like
devils, and these unite in making great rejoicing with the
players on the instruments, in order that the devil may
make that rice very productive.</q><note place='foot'>Ludovico di Varthema, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in
Egypt, Syria</hi>, etc., translated by J. W.
Jones (Hakluyt Society, London, 1863),
pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We may suspect that the
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
noisy music is played and the mummers cut their capers for
the purpose rather of repelling demons than of inducing
them to favour the growth of the rice. However, where our
information is so scanty it would be rash to dogmatize.
Perhaps the old traveller was right in thinking that the
mummers personated devils. Among the Kayans of Central
Borneo men disguised in wooden masks and great masses of
green foliage certainly play the part of demons for the purpose
of promoting the growth of the rice just before the seed
is committed to the ground; and it is notable that among
the performances which they give on this occasion are war
dances.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 95, 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, among the Kaua and Kobeua Indians of
North-Western Brazil masked men who represent spirits or
demons of fertility perform dances or rather pantomimes for
the purpose of stimulating the growth of plants, quickening
the wombs of women, and promoting the multiplication of
animals.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dances in
Aracan for
the sake of
the crops.
Dances of
the Tarahumare
Indians of
Mexico to
procure
rain for
their crops.</note>
Further, we are told that <q>the natives of Aracan dance
in order to render propitious the spirits whom they believe
to preside over the sowing and over the harvest. There are
definite times for doing it, and we may say that in their eyes
it is, as it were, an act of religion.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation de la
Foi</hi>, liii. (1881) p. 178.</note> Another people who
dance diligently to obtain good crops are the Tarahumare
Indians of Mexico. They subsist by agriculture and their
thoughts accordingly turn much on the supply of rain, which
is needed for their fields. According to them, <q>the favour
of the gods may be won by what for want of a better term
may be called dancing, but what in reality is a series of
monotonous movements, a kind of rhythmical exercise, kept
up sometimes for two nights. By dint of such hard work
they think to prevail upon the gods to grant their prayers.
The dancing is accompanied by the song of the shaman, in
which he communicates his wishes to the unseen world,
describing the beautiful effect of the rain, the fog, and the
mist on the vegetable world. He invokes the aid of all the
animals, mentioning each by name, and also calls on them,
especially the deer and the rabbit, to multiply that the people
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
may have plenty to eat. As a matter of fact, the Tarahumares
assert that the dances have been taught them by
the animals. Like all primitive people, they are close
observers of nature. To them the animals are by no means
inferior creatures; they understand magic and are possessed
of much knowledge, and may assist the Tarahumares in
making rain. In spring, the singing of the birds, the cooing
of the dove, the croaking of the frog, the chirping of the
cricket, all the sounds uttered by the denizens of the greensward,
are to the Indian appeals to the deities for rain. For
what other reason should they sing or call? For the strange
behaviour of many animals in the early spring the Tarahumares
can find no other explanation but that these
creatures, too, are interested in rain. And as the gods grant
the prayers of the deer expressed in its antics and dances,
and of the turkey in its curious playing, by sending the rain,
they easily infer that to please the gods they, too, must
dance as the deer and play as the turkey. From this it will
be understood that dance with these people is a very serious
and ceremonious matter, a kind of worship and incantation
rather than amusement.</q><note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi> (London, 1903), i. 330 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dances of
the Tarahumare
Indians to
cause rain
to fall, corn
to sprout,
grass to
grow, and
animals to
multiply.</note>
The two principal dances of these Indians, the <foreign rend='italic'>rutuburi</foreign>
and the <foreign rend='italic'>yumari</foreign>, are supposed to have been taught them by
the turkey and the deer respectively. They are danced by
numbers of men and women, the two sexes keeping apart
from each other in the dance, while the shaman sings and
shakes his rattle. But <q>a large gathering is not necessary in
order to pray to the gods by dancing. Sometimes the family
dances alone, the father teaching the boys. While doing
agricultural work, the Indians often depute one man to dance
<foreign rend='italic'>yumari</foreign> near the house, while the others attend to the work
in the fields. It is a curious sight to see a lone man taking
his devotional exercise to the tune of his rattle in front of
an apparently deserted dwelling. The lonely worshipper is
doing his share of the general work by bringing down the
fructifying rain and by warding off disaster, while the rest of
the family and their friends plant, hoe, weed, or harvest. In
the evening, when they return from the field, they may join
him for a little while; but often he goes on alone, dancing
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
all night, and singing himself hoarse, and the Indians told
me that this is the very hardest kind of work, and exhausting
even to them. Solitary worship is also observed by men
who go out hunting deer or squirrels for a communal feast.
Every one of them dances <foreign rend='italic'>yumari</foreign> alone in front of his house
for two hours to insure success on the hunt; and when putting
corn to sprout for the making of <foreign rend='italic'>tesvino</foreign> the owner of
the house dances for a while, that the corn may sprout well.</q>
Another dance is thought to cause the grass and funguses to
grow, and the deer and rabbits to multiply; and another is
supposed to draw the clouds together from the north and
south, so that they clash and descend in rain.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), i. 335 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 352 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dance of
the Cora
Indians at
the sowing
festival.</note>
The Cora Indians of Mexico celebrate a festival of sowing
shortly before they commit the seed of the maize to
the ground. The festival falls in June, because that is the
month when the rainy season sets in, supplying the moisture
needed for the growth of the maize. At the festival two
old women, who represent the goddesses of sowing, dance
side by side and imitate the process of sowing by digging
holes in the earth with long sticks and inserting the seed of
the maize in the holes; whereupon a man who represents the
Morning Star pours water on the buried seeds. This solemn
dance is accompanied by the singing of an appropriate
hymn, which may be compared to the song of the Arval
Brothers in ancient Rome.<note place='foot'>K. Th. Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Die Nayarit-Expedition</hi>,
I. <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der Cora-Indianer</hi>
(Leipsic, 1912), pp. xcviii.
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 61-63. As to the sowing festival
of the Mexican Indians, compare K. Th.
Preuss, <q>Die religiösen Gesänge und
Mythen einiger Stämme der mexikanischen
Sierra Madre,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
xi. (1908) pp.
374 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dances and
leaps of
European
peasants to
make the
corn grow
tall.</note>
We have seen that in many parts of Germany, Austria,
and France the peasants are still, or were till lately, accustomed
to dance and leap high in order that the crops
may grow tall. Such leaps and dances are sometimes
performed by the sower immediately before or after he
sows the seed; but often they are executed by the people
on a fixed day of the year, which in some places is Twelfth
Night (the sixth of January), or Candlemas (the second of
February) or Walpurgis Night, that is, the Eve of May
Day; but apparently the favourite season for these performances
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
is the last day of the Carnival, namely Shrove
Tuesday.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 137-139.</note> In such cases the leaps and dances are performed
by every man for his own behoof; he skips and jumps
merely in order that his own corn, or flax, or hemp may
spring up and thrive. But sometimes in modern Europe, as
(if I am right) in ancient Rome, the duty of dancing for the
crops was committed to bands or troops of men, who cut
their capers for the benefit of the whole community. For
example, at Grub, in the Swiss canton of the Grisons (Graubünden),
the practice used to be as follows. <q>The peasants of
Grub,</q> we are informed, <q>have still some hereditary customs,
in that they assembled in some years, mostly at the time of
the summer solstice, disguised themselves as maskers so as
to be unrecognizable, armed themselves with weapons defensive
and offensive, took every man a great club or cudgel,
marched in a troop together from one village to another,
and executed high leaps and strange antics. They ran full
tilt at each other, struck every man his fellow with all his
might, so that the blow resounded, and clashed their great
staves and cudgels. Hence they were called by the country
folk the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Stopfer</foreign>. These foolish pranks they played from a
superstitious notion that their corn would thrive the better;
but now they have left off, and these <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Stopfer</foreign> are no longer
in any repute.</q> Another authority, after describing the custom,
remarks: <q>With this custom was formerly connected
the belief that its observance brought a fruitful year.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. F. J. Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
deutschen Mythologie gesammelt in
Churrhaetien</hi> (Chur, 1862), p. 21,
quoting J. Stumpf and Ulr. Campell.
As the passage is curious and the work
probably rare, I will quote the original
in full: <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sicherlich auch im zusammenhange
mit Donarcultus war ein brauch
der leute in der Grub (in Graubünden).</foreign>
<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Die landleute in der Grub haben noch
etwas anererbte bräuche, indem dass
sie sich zu etlichen jahren (meistens zur
zeit der sonnenwende) besammelten, verbutzten
(sich als masken vermummten)
und einander unbekannt machten,
legten harnisch und geweer an, und
nahm jeder ein grossen kolben oder
knüttel, zugen in einer rott mit einander
von einem dorf zum andern, triben hohe
sprünge und seltsame abentheur.&mdash;Sie
luffen gestracks laufs aneinander,
stiessen mit kräften je einer den andern,
dass es erhillt, stiessen laut mit ihren
grössen stöcken und knütteln, deswegen
sie vom landvolk genannt werden die
Stopfer. Diese thorechte abentheuer triben
sie zum aberglauben, dass ihnen das
korn destobas gerathen sölle, haben
aber anjetzo abgelassen, und sind diese
Stopfer in keiner achtung mehr</foreign>.</q>
(Joh. Stumpf). <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Auch Ulr. Campell
erwähnt dieses volksbrauch (s. 11) und
bemerkt</foreign>: <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>mit diesem gebrauche hing
früher der glaube zusammen, dass
dessen ausübung ein fruchtbares
jahr bringe.</foreign></q></q> The word <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Stopfer</foreign>
means <q>stopper,</q> <q>rammer,</q> <q>crammer,</q>
etc.</note>
</p>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dances of
mummers
called
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
in Austria
for the
good of
the crops.
The
mythical
old woman
called
Perchta.</note>
In the Austrian provinces of Salzburg and Tyrol bands
of mummers wearing grotesque masks, with bells jingling on
their persons, and carrying long sticks or poles in their
hands, used formerly to run and leap about on certain days
of the year for the purpose of procuring good crops. They
were called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>, a name derived from Perchta, Berchta,
or Percht, a mythical old woman, whether goddess or elf, who
is well known all over South Germany; Mrs. Perchta (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Frau
Perchta</foreign>), as they call her, is to be met with in Elsace,
Swabia, Bavaria, Austria, and Switzerland, but nowhere,
perhaps, so commonly as in Salzburg and the Tyrol. In
the Tyrol she appears as a little old woman with a very
wrinkled face, bright lively eyes, and a long hooked nose;
her hair is dishevelled, her garments tattered and torn.
Hence they say to a slatternly wench, <q>You are a regular
Perchta.</q> She goes about especially during the twelve
days from Christmas to Twelfth Night (Epiphany), above
all on the Eve of Twelfth Night, which is often called
Perchta's Day. Many precautions must be observed during
these mystic days in order not to incur her displeasure, for
she is mischievous to man and beast. If she appears in the
byre, a distemper breaks out among the cows. That is why
during these days the byres must be kept very clean and
straw laid on the threshold; otherwise you will find bald
patches on your sheep and goats next morning, and next
summer the hair which has been filched from the animals
will descend in hail-stones from the sky. Old Mrs. Perchta
also keeps a very sharp eye on spinners during the twelve
days; she inspects all distaffs and spinning-wheels in the
houses, and if she finds any flax or tow unspun on them, she
tears it to bits, and she does not spare the lazy spinner, for
she scratches her and smacks her fingers so that they bear
the marks of it for the rest of her life. Indeed she sometimes
does much more; for she rips up the belly of the
sluggard and stuffs it with flax. That is the punishment
with which a Bavarian mother will threaten an idle jade of
a girl who has left some flax on her distaff on New Year's
Eve. However, they say in Bavaria that if you only eat
plenty of the rich juicy cakes which are baked for Mrs.
Perchta on her day, the old woman's knife will glance off
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
your body without making any impression on it. Perchta
often comes not alone but attended by many little children,
who follow her as chickens waddle after the mother hen;
and if you should see any little child lagging behind the rest
and blubbering, you may be quite sure that that child has
been baptized. On the Eve of Twelfth Night everybody
should eat pancakes baked of meal and milk or water. If
anybody does not do so, old Mrs. Perchta comes and slits
up his stomach, takes out the other food, fills up the vacuity
so created with a tangled skein and bricks, and then sews
up the orifice neatly, using, singularly enough, a ploughshare
for a needle and an iron chain for thread. In
other or the same places she does the same thing to anybody
who does not eat herrings and dumplings on Twelfth
Night. Some say that she rides on the storm like the Wild
Huntsman, followed by a boisterous noisy pack, and carrying
off people into far countries. Yet withal old Mrs.
Perchta has her redeeming qualities. Good children who
spin diligently and learn their lessons she rewards with nuts
and sugar plums. It has even been affirmed that she makes
the ploughed land fruitful and causes the cattle to thrive.
When a mist floats over the fields, the peasants see her
figure gliding along in a white mantle. On the Eve of
Twelfth Night good people leave the remains of their supper
for her on the table, and when they have gone to bed and
all is quiet in the house, she comes in the likeness of an
old wizened little woman, with all the children about her,
and partakes of the broken victuals. But woe to the prying
wight who peeps at her through the key-hole! Many a
man has been blinded by her for a whole year as a punishment
for his ill-timed curiosity.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
(Berlin, 1875-1878), i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, iii.
88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Fr. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855),
i. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 381; I. V.
Zingerle, <q>Perahta in Tirol,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für deutsche Mythologie</hi>, iii.
(Göttingen, 1855), pp. 203-206; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des
Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Innsbruck, 1871), pp.
128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq</hi>.; J. M. Ritter von Alpenburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</hi>
(Zürich, 1857), pp. 46-51, 63-65;
<hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des
Königreichs Bayern</hi> (Munich, 1860-1867),
i. 365; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1869), § 25,
pp. 25-27; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus
der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1875), pp. 542 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Karl Weinhold, <hi rend='italic'>Weinacht-Spiele und
Lieder aus Süddeutschland und Schlesien</hi>
(Vienna, 1875), pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Mogk,
in H. Paul's <hi rend='italic'>Grundriss der germanischen
Philologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> iii. (Strasburg, 1900),
pp. 280 <hi rend='italic'>sq</hi>. (where it is said that
Perchta <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>spendet dem Acker Fruchtbarkeit
und lässt das Vieh gedeihen</foreign></q>);
E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie der Germanen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1903), pp. 424 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
P. Herrmann, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M.
Andree-Eysen, <hi rend='italic'>Volkskundliches aus dem
bayrisch-österreichischen Alpengebiet</hi>
(Brunswick, 1910), pp. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E.
Hoffmann-Krayer, <hi rend='italic'>Feste und Bräuche
des Schweizervolkes</hi> (Zürich, 1913),
pp. 118 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The running
and
leaping
of the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
mummers
on Twelfth
Night.
The
Beautiful
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
and the
Ugly
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>.</note>
The processions of maskers who took their name of
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> from this quaint creation of the popular fancy were
known as <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>-running or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>-leaping from the
runs and leaps which the men took in their wild headlong
course through the streets and over the fields. They appear
to have been held in all the Alpine regions of Germany, but
are best known to us in the Tyrol and Salzburg. The
appropriate season for the celebration of the rite was
Perchta's Day, that is, Twelfth Night or Epiphany, the sixth
of January, but in some places it was held on Shrove
Tuesday, the last day of the Carnival, the very day when
many farmers of Central Europe jump to make the crops
grow tall. Corresponding to the double character of Perchta
as a power for good and evil, the maskers are divided into
two sets known respectively as the Beautiful and the Ugly
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>. At Lienz in the Tyrol, where the maskers made
their appearance on Shrove Tuesday, the Beautiful <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
were decked with ribbons, galloons, and so forth, while the
ugly <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> made themselves as hideous as they could by
hanging rats and mice, chains and bells about their persons.
All wore on their heads tall pointed caps with bells attached
to them; their faces were concealed by masks, and in their
hands they all carried long sticks. The sticks of the
Beautiful <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> were adorned with ribbons; those of the
Ugly <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> ended in the heads of devils. Thus equipped
they leaped and ran about the streets and went into the
houses. Amongst them was a clown who blew ashes and
soot in people's faces through a blow-pipe. It was all very
merry and frolicsome, except when <q>the wild Perchta</q> herself
came, invisible to ordinary eyes, upon the scene. Then
her namesakes the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> grew wild and furious too; they
scattered and fled for their lives to the nearest house, for as
soon as they got under the gutter of a roof they were safe.
But if she caught them, she tore them in pieces. To this
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
day you may see the graves where the mangled bodies of
her victims lie buried. When no such interruption took
place, the noisy rout of maskers rushed madly about, with
jingling bells and resounding cracks of whips, entering the
houses, dancing here, drinking there, teasing wayfarers,
or racing from village to village like the Wild Hunt itself in
the sky; till at the close of the winter day the church bells
rang the <hi rend='italic'>Ave Maria</hi>. Then at last the wild uproar died
away into silence. Such tumultuous masquerades were
thought to be very beneficial to the crops; a bad harvest
would be set down to the omission of the <hi rend='italic'>Perchten</hi> to skip
and jump about in their usual fashion.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 231; I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1871), pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp. 542 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. M. Ritter von Alpenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen
und Sagen Tirols</hi> (Zürich, 1857), pp.
50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; K. Weinhold, <hi rend='italic'>Weinacht-Spiele
und Lieder aus Süddeutschland und
Schlesien</hi> (Vienna, 1875), pp. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Ugly
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in
Salzburg.</note>
In the province of Salzburg the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> mummers are
also divided into two sets, the Beautiful <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> and the
Ugly <hi rend='italic'>Perchten</hi>. The Ugly <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> are properly speaking
twelve young men dressed in black sheepskins and wearing
hoods of badger-skins and grotesque wooden masks, which
represent either coarse human features with long teeth and
horns, or else the features of fabulous animals with beaks
and bristles or movable jaws. They all carry bells, both
large and small, fastened to broad leathern girdles. The procession
was headed by a man with a big drum, and after
him came lads bearing huge torches and lanterns fastened to
tall poles; for in Salzburg or some parts of it these mummers
played their pranks by night. Behind the torchbearers
came two Fools, a male and a female, the latter
acted by a lad in woman's clothes. The male Fool carried
a sausage-like roll, with which he struck at all women or
girls of his acquaintance when they shewed themselves at
the open doors or windows. Along with the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
themselves went a train of young fellows cracking whips,
blowing horns, or jingling bells. The ways might be
miry and the night pitch dark, but with flaring lights
the procession swept rapidly by, the men leaping along
with the help of their long sticks and waking the echoes
of the slumbering valley by their loud uproar. From
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
time to time they stopped at a farm, danced and cut their
capers before the house, for which they were rewarded by
presents of food and strong drink; to offer them money
would have been an insult. By midnight the performance
came to an end, and the tired maskers dispersed to their
homes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Beautiful
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in
Salzburg.</note>
The Beautiful <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in Salzburg are attired very
differently from the Ugly <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>, but their costume varies
with the district. Thus in the Pongau district the distinctive
feature of their costume is a tall and heavy framework covered
with bright red cloth and decorated with a profusion of silver
jewelry and filagree work. This framework is sometimes
nine or ten feet high and forty or fifty pounds in weight.
The performer carries it above his head by means of iron
supports resting on his shoulders or his back. To run or
jump under the weight of such an encumbrance is impossible;
the dancer has to content himself with turning round
and round slowly and clumsily. Very different is the headdress
of the Beautiful <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in the Pinzgau district of
Salzburg. There the performers are dressed in scarlet and
wear straw hats, from which bunches of white feathers,
arranged like fans, nod and flutter in the wind. Red shoes
and white stockings complete their attire. Thus lightly
equipped they hop and jump and stamp briskly in the
dance. Unlike their Ugly namesakes, who seem now to be
extinct, the Beautiful <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> still parade from time to time
among the peasantry of the Salzburg highlands; but the
intervals between their appearances are irregular, varying
from four to seven years or more. Unlike the Ugly
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>, they wear no masks and appear in full daylight,
always on Perchta's Day (Twelfth Night, the sixth of
January) and the two following Sundays. They are attended
by a train of followers who make a great din with bells,
whips, pipes, horns, rattles, and chains. Amongst them one
or two clowns, clothed in white and wearing tall pointed
hats of white felt with many jingling bells attached to them,
play a conspicuous part. They carry each a sausage-shaped
roll stuffed with tow, and with this instrument they
strike lightly such women and girls among the spectators
as they desire particularly to favour. Another attendant
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
carries the effigy of a baby in swaddling bands, made of
linen rags, and fastened to a string; this effigy he throws at
women and girls and then pulls back again, but he does
this only to women and girls whom he respects and to whom
he wishes well. At St. Johann the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> carry drawn
swords; each is attended by a lad dressed as a woman; and
they are followed by men clad in black sheepskins, wearing
the masks of devils, and holding chains in their hands.<note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>Volkskundliches
aus dem bayrisch-österreichischen
Alpengebiet</hi> (Brunswick, 1910), pp.
156-175.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mrs.
Andree-Eysn
on the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>;
according
to her, the
processions
of Perchten
are intended
to
promote
fertility by
banishing
the demons
that would
thwart it.</note>
What is the meaning of the quaint performances still
enacted by the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> and their attendants in the Austrian
highlands? The subject has been carefully investigated
by a highly competent enquirer, Mrs. Andree-Eysn. She
has visited the districts, witnessed the performances,
collected information, and studied the costumes. It may
be well to quote her conclusion: <q rend='pre'>If we enquire into
the inner meaning which underlies the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>-race and
kindred processions, we must confess that it is not at
first sight obvious, and that the original meaning appears
blurred and indistinct. Nevertheless from many features
which they present in common it can be demonstrated that
the processions were held for the purpose of driving away
demons and had for their object to promote fertility.
In favour of this view it may be urged, first of all, that
their appearance is everywhere greeted with joy, because it
promises fertility and a good harvest. <q>It is a good year,</q>
they say in Salzburg. If the processions are prevented from
taking place, dearth and a bad harvest are to be apprehended.
The peasants of the Tyrol still believe that the more <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
run about, the better will the year be, and therefore they
treat them to brandy and cakes. In Lienz, when the
harvest turns out ill, they say that they omitted to let the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> run over the fields, and for that reason the peasant
in the Sarn valley gets the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> to leap about on his
fields, for then there will be a good year.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If fertility and blessing are to be poured out on field,
house, and homestead, it is obvious that everything that
could hinder or harm must be averted and driven away.
When we consider how even at the present time, and still
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
more in times gone by, much that is harmful is attributed to
the malevolence of invisible powers, we can readily understand
why people should resort to measures which they deem
effective for the purpose of disarming these malevolent beings.
Now it is a common belief that certain masks possess the
virtue of banning demons, and that loud noise and din are a
means of keeping off evil spirits or hindering their activity.
In the procession of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> we see the principle of the
banishment of evil carried out in practice. The people attack
the evil spirits and seek to chase them away by putting on
frightful masks, with which they confront the demon. For
one sort of malevolent spirits one kind of mask appears suitable,
and for another another; this spirit is daunted by this
mask, and that spirit by that; and so they came to discriminate.
Originally, particular masks may have been used
against particular evil spirits, but in course of time they were
confused, the individual taste of the maker of the mask
counted for something, and so gradually it resulted in carving
all kinds of horrible, fantastic, and hideous masks which had
nothing in common but their general tendency to frighten
away all evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>Volkskundliches
aus dem bayrisch-österreichischen
Alpengebiet</hi> (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 179
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The authoress kindly presented
me with a copy of her valuable work in
May 1910, when I had the pleasure
of visiting her and her husband, the
eminent anthropologist, the late Dr.
Richard Andree, in their home at
Munich.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
bells worn
by the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
mummers
may be
intended
to ban
demons. Bells rung
to make
the grass
grow in
spring.
Bells rung
to make
the flax
grow. Whips
cracked
to make
the flax
grow.</note>
In support of her view that the procession of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>
aims chiefly at banishing demons who might otherwise blight
the crops, Mrs. Andree-Eysn lays stress on the bells which
figure so prominently in the costume of these maskers; for
the sound of bells, as she reminds us, is commonly believed
to be a potent means of driving evil spirits away. The
notion is too familiar to call for proof,<note place='foot'>See P. Sartori, <q>Glockensagen
und Glockenaberglaube,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
des Vereins für Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897)
pp. 360 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The use in classical
antiquity of bells, gongs, and the clash
of bronze generally to ban the demon
host has been learnedly illustrated by
Mr. A. B. Cook in his article, <q>The
Gong at Dodona,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, xxii. (1902) pp. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> but a single case from
Central Africa may be cited as an illustration. The Teso
people, who inhabit a land of rolling plains between Mount
Elgon and Lake Kioga, <q>make use of bells to exorcise the
storm fiend; a person who has been injured by a flash or in
the resulting fire wears bells round his ankles for weeks
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
afterwards. Whenever rain threatens, and rain in Uganda
almost always comes in company with thunder and lightning,
this person will parade the village for an hour, with the
jingling bells upon his legs and a wand of papyrus in his
hand, attended by as many of his family as may happen to
be at hand and not employed in necessary duties.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. A. L. Kitching, <hi rend='italic'>On the
Backwaters of the Nile</hi> (London, 1912),
p. 264. As to the country of the Teso
people, who do not belong to the Bantu
stock, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
resemblance of such men, with their bells and wands, to the
Austrian <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> with their bells and wands is, on the
theory in question, fairly close; both of them go about
to dispel demons by the sound of their bells and probably
also by the blows of their rods. Whatever may be thought
of their efficacy in banning fiends, certain it is that in the
Tyrol, where the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> play their pranks, the chime of
bells is used for the express purpose of causing the grass to
grow in spring. Thus in the lower valley of the Inn,
especially at Schwaz, on the twenty-fourth of April (there
reckoned St. George's Day) troops of young fellows go about
ringing bells, some of which they hold in their hands, while
others are attached to their persons; and the peasants say,
<q>Wherever the Grass-ringers come, there the grass grows well,
and the corn bears abundant fruit.</q> Hence the bell-ringers
are welcomed and treated wherever they go. Formerly, it is
said, they wore masks, like the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>, but afterwards they
contented themselves with blackening their faces with soot.<note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
180-182. As to the custom of <q>ringing-out
the grass,</q> see further W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 540; <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>,
ii. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In other parts of the Tyrol the bell-ringing processions take
place at the Carnival, but their object is the same; for <q>it
is believed that by this noisy procession growth in general,
but especially the growth of the meadows, is promoted.</q><note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
182.</note>
Again, at Bergell, in the Swiss canton of the Grisons,
children go in procession on the first of March ringing bells,
<q>in order that the grass may grow.</q><note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> So in Hildesheim,
on the afternoon of Ascension Day, young girls ascend
the church tower and ring all the church bells, <q>in order
that they may get a good harvest of flax; the girl who,
hanging on to the bell-rope, is swung highest by the swing
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
of the bell, will get the longest flax.</q><note place='foot'>K. Seifart, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen,
Schwänke und Gebräuche aus Stadt
und Stift Hildesheim</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Hildesheim,
1889), p. 180. For more evidence of
the supposed fertilizing influence of
bells, see P. Sartori, <q>Glockensagen
und Glockenaberglaube,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
des Vereins für Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897)
pp. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the sound of
the bells as a means of promoting the growth of the flax is
reinforced by the upward swing of the bell, which, carrying
with it the bell-ringer at the end of the rope, naturally causes
the flax in like manner to rise high in the air. It is a simple
piece of imitative magic, like the leaps and bounds which
the peasants of Central Europe often execute for precisely
the same purpose. Once more, in various parts of the
Tyrol on Senseless Thursday, which is the last Thursday in
Carnival, young men in motley attire, with whips and brooms,
run about cracking their whips and making believe to sweep
away the onlookers with their brooms. They are called
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huttler</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huddler</foreign>. The people say that if these fellows do
not run about, the flax will not thrive, and that on the contrary
the more of them run about, the better will the flax
grow. And where there are many of them, there will be
much maize.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, Sitten, <hi rend='italic'>Bräuche und
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Innsbruck,
1871), pp. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 139, § 1196,
1211, 1212.</note> In this custom the cracking of the whips may
be supposed to serve the same purpose as the ringing of the
bells by frightening and banishing the demons of infertility
and dearth. About Hall, in the northern Tyrol, the ceremony
of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Hudel</foreign>-running, as it is called, is or used to be
as follows. A peasant-farmer, generally well-to-do and respected,
rigs himself out in motley and hides his face under
a mask; round his waist he wears a girdle crammed with
rolls, while in his hand he wields a long whip, from which
more than fifty cracknels dangle on a string. Thus
arrayed he suddenly bursts from the ale-house door
into the public view, solicited thereto by the cries of the
street urchins, who have been anxiously waiting for his
appearance. He throws amongst them the string of cracknels,
and while they are scrambling for these dainties, he lays on
to them most liberally with his whip. Having faithfully
discharged this public duty, he marches down between rows
of peasants, who have meantime taken up their position in a
long street. Amongst them he picks out one who is to run
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
before him. The man selected for the honour accordingly
takes to his heels, hotly pursued by the other with the whip,
who lashes the feet of the fugitive till he comes up with him.
Having run him down, he leads him back to the alehouse,
where he treats him to a roll and a glass of wine. After
that the masker runs a similar race with another man; and
so it goes on, one race after another, till the sun sets. Then
the mummer doffs his mask and leads the dance in the alehouse.
The object of these races is said to be to ensure a
good crop of flax and maize.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Certain
features
in these
processions
or races of
mummers
seem to
shew
that the
mummers
represent
beneficent
spirits of
fertility,
who
quicken
the seed
in the
ground and
offspring
in the
wombs of
women. The
view of
W. Mannhardt.</note>
In these races of mummers, whether known as <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> or
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huttler</foreign>, there are certain features which it is difficult to
explain on the theory that the aim of the performers is
simply to drive away demons, and that the hideous masks
which they assume have no other intention than that of
frightening these uncanny beings. For observe that in the
last example the blows of the whip fall not on the airy
swarms of invisible spirits, but on the solid persons of street
urchins and sturdy yokels, who can hardly be supposed to
receive the chastisement vicariously for the demons. Again,
what are we to make of the rolls and cracknels with which
in this case the mummer is laden, and which he distributes
among his victims, as if to console them in one part of their
person for the pain which he has inflicted on another?
Surely this bounty seems to invest him with something more
than the purely negative character of an exorciser of evil;
it appears to raise him to the positive character of a dispenser
of good. The same remark applies to the action of the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> who strike women lightly, as a mark of friendship
and regard, with the sausage-like rolls which they carry in
their hands, or throw them, as a mark of favour, the effigy
of a baby. The only probable explanation of these practices,
as Mrs. Andree-Eysn rightly points out, is that the mummers
thereby intend to fertilize the women whom they honour by
these attentions.<note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here, again, therefore the maskers appear
as the actual dispensers of good, the bestowers of fruitfulness,
not merely the averters of evil. If that is so, we
seem bound to infer that these masked men represent or
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
embody the spirits who quicken the seed both in the earth
and in the wombs of women. That was the view of W.
Mannhardt, the highest authority on the agricultural superstitions
of European peasantry. After reviewing these and
many more similar processions, he concludes that if the
comparison which he has instituted between them holds
good, all these various mummers <q>were intended by the
original founders of the processions to represent demons of
vegetation, who by their mere appearance and cries drove
away the powers that hinder growth and woke to new life
the slumbering spirits of the grasses and corn-stalks.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
548.</note> Thus
Mannhardt admitted that these noisy processions of masked
men are really supposed to dispel the evil spirits of blight
and infertility, while at the same time he held that the men
themselves originally personated vegetation-spirits. And he
thought it probable that the original significance of these
performances was in later times misunderstood and interpreted
as a simple expulsion of witches and other uncanny
beings that haunt the fields.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Confirmations
of
this view. The use
of bells and swords in
these ceremonies.</note>
On the whole this conclusion of an enquirer remarkable
for a rare combination of learning, sobriety, and insight, is
perhaps the most probable that can now be reached with the
evidence at our disposal. It is confirmed by some of the
savage masquerades in which the maskers definitely represent
spirits of fertility in order to promote the fruitfulness of the
earth and of women;<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</note> and it is supported by the evidence
of many other rustic mummeries in Europe, for example, by
the English rites of Plough Monday, in which the dancers,
or rather jumpers, who wore bunches of corn in their hats
as they leaped into the air, are most naturally interpreted as
agents or representatives of the corn-spirit.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, ii. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It is, therefore,
worth observing that in some places the dancers of Plough
Monday, who attended the plough in its peregrinations
through the streets and fields, are described as morris-dancers.<note place='foot'>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British
Popular Customs</hi> (London, 1876), p.
32; <hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore, Printed Extracts,
No. 3, Leicestershire and Rutlandshire</hi>,
collected and edited by C. J. Billson
(London, 1895), pp. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
If the description is correct, it implies that they
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
had bells attached to their costume, which would further
assimilate them to the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> and other masqueraders of
Central Europe; for the chief characteristic of the morris-dance
is that the performers wear bells fastened to their legs
which jingle at every step.<note place='foot'>Mrs. Lilly Grove (Mrs. J. G. Frazer),
<hi rend='italic'>Dancing</hi> (London, 1895), pp. 147 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi>
(Oxford, 1903), i. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> We may suppose that if the
men who ran and capered beside the plough on Plough
Monday really wore bells, the original intention of this
appendage to their costume was either to dispel the demons
who might hinder the growth of the corn, or to waken the
spirits of vegetation from their long winter sleep. In favour
of the view which sees in all these dances and mummeries
rather the banishment of what is evil than the direct promotion
of what is good, it may be urged that some of the
dancers wear swords,<note place='foot'>As to the swords carried by the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> see above, p. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>; as to those
carried by the dancers on Plough
Monday, see J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities
of Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
i. 505. As to the sword-dance
in general, see K. Müllenhoff, <q>Über
den Schwerttanz,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Festgaben für
Gustav Homeyer</hi> (Berlin, 1871), pp.
111-147 (who compares the dances of
the Salii); Mrs. Lilly Grove, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 189 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 211 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. K. Chambers,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> a weapon which certainly seems better
fitted to combat demons than to prune fruit-trees or turn up
the sod. Further, it deserves to be noted that many of the
performances take place either on Twelfth Day or, like the
celebration of Plough Monday, very shortly after it; and
that in the Lord of Misrule, who reigned from Christmas to
Twelfth Day,<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> we have a clear trace of one of those periods
of general licence and suspension of ordinary government,
which so commonly occur at the end of the old year or the
beginning of the new one in connexion with a general
expulsion of evils.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These masquerades
originally
intended
both to
stimulate
vegetation
in spring
and to
expel
demons.</note>
Surveying these masquerades and processions, as they
have been or still are celebrated in modern Europe, we may
say in general that they appear to have been originally
intended both to stimulate the growth of vegetation in spring
and to expel the demoniac or other evil influences which
were thought to have accumulated during the preceding
winter or year; and that these two motives of stimulation
and expulsion, blended and perhaps confused together, appear
to explain the quaint costumes of the mummers, the multitudinous
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
noises which they make, and the blows which they
direct either at invisible foes or at the visible and tangible
persons of their fellows. In the latter case the beating
may be supposed to serve as a means of forcibly freeing the
sufferers from the demons or other evil things that cling to
them unseen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Application
of
these conclusions
to the
expulsion
of <q>the
Old Mars</q>
in ancient
Rome.</note>
To apply these conclusions to the Roman custom of
expelling Mamurius Veturius or <q>the Old Mars</q> every year
in spring, we may say that they lend some support to the
theory which sees in <q>the Old Mars</q> the outworn deity of
vegetation driven away to make room, either for a younger
and more vigorous personification of vernal life, or perhaps
for the return of the same deity refreshed and renovated by
the treatment to which he had been subjected, and particularly
by the vigorous application of the rod to his sacred
person. For, as we shall see presently, King Solomon was
by no means singular in his opinion of the refreshing
influence of a sound thrashing. So far as <q>the Old Mars</q>
was supposed to carry away with him the accumulated
weaknesses and other evils of the past year, so far would he
serve as a public scapegoat, like the effigy in the Slavonic
custom of <q>Carrying out Death,</q> which appears not only to
represent the vegetation-spirit of the past year, but also to
act as a scapegoat, carrying away with it a heavy load
of suffering, misfortune, and death.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Greece.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Greece.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
scapegoats
in ancient
Greece.
The <q>Expulsion
of
Hunger</q>
at Chaeronea.</note>
The ancient Greeks were also familiar with the use of a
human scapegoat. In Plutarch's native town of Chaeronea a
ceremony of this kind was performed by the chief magistrate
at the Town Hall, and by each householder at his own home.
It was called the <q>expulsion of hunger.</q> A slave was beaten
with rods of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agnus castus</foreign>, and turned out of doors with
the words, <q>Out with hunger, and in with wealth and health.</q>
When Plutarch held the office of chief magistrate of his
native town he performed this ceremony at the Town Hall,
and he has recorded the discussion to which the custom
afterwards gave rise.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. conviv.</hi> vi. 8.</note> The ceremony closely resembles
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
the Japanese, Hindoo, and Highland customs already
described.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 209.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
scapegoats
at Marseilles.
Human
scapegoats
put to
death at
Athens. Human
scapegoats
annually
stoned to
death at
Abdera.</note>
But in civilized Greece the custom of the scapegoat took
darker forms than the innocent rite over which the amiable
and pious Plutarch presided. Whenever Marseilles, one of the
busiest and most brilliant of Greek colonies, was ravaged by
a plague, a man of the poorer classes used to offer himself
as a scapegoat. For a whole year he was maintained at
the public expense, being fed on choice and pure food. At
the expiry of the year he was dressed in sacred garments,
decked with holy branches, and led through the whole city,
while prayers were uttered that all the evils of the people
might fall on his head. He was then cast out of the city
or stoned to death by the people outside of the walls.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 57,
following Petronius; Lactantius Placidius,
<hi rend='italic'>Commentarii in Statii Thebaida</hi>
x. 793, p. 452, ed. R. Jahnke (Leipsic,
1898). According to the former writer,
the scapegoat was cast out (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>projiciebatur</foreign></q>);
according to the latter, he was
stoned to death by the people outside
of the walls (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>extra pomeria saxis
occidebatur a populo</foreign></q>). The statement
of some modern writers that he was
killed by being hurled from a height
rests on a reading (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praecipitabatur</foreign></q>
for <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>projiciebatur</foreign></q>) in the text of
Servius, which appears to have no
manuscript authority and to be merely
a conjecture of R. Stephan's. Yet the
conjecture has been inserted in the text
by F. Buecheler in his edition of
Petronius (Third Edition, Berlin, 1882,
p. 109) without any intimation that all
the MSS. present a different reading.
See the critical edition of Servius edited
by G. Thilo and H. Hagen, vol. i.
(Leipsic, 1881), p. 346.</note> The
Athenians regularly maintained a number of degraded and
useless beings at the public expense; and when any calamity,
such as plague, drought, or famine, befell the city, they sacrificed
two of these outcasts as scapegoats. One of the victims was
sacrificed for the men and the other for the women. The
former wore round his neck a string of black, the latter a
string of white figs. Sometimes, it seems, the victim slain
on behalf of the women was a woman. They were led about
the city and then sacrificed, apparently by being stoned to
death outside the city.<note place='foot'>Helladius, in Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>,
p. 534 <hi rend='smallcaps'>A</hi>, ed. Im. Bekker (Berlin, 1824);
Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 734,
and on <hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi>, 1136; Hesychius,
<hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> φαρμακοὶ; compare Suidas,
<hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> κάθαρμα, φαρμακός, and
φαρμακούς; Lysias, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> vi. 53. That
they were stoned is an inference from
Harpocration. See next note. When
the people of Cyrene sacrificed to Saturn
(Cronus), they wore crowns of fresh
figs on their heads. See Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>, i. 7. 25.</note> But such sacrifices were not confined
to extraordinary occasions of public calamity; it
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
appears that every year, at the festival of the Thargelia in
May, two victims, one for the men and one for the women,
were led out of Athens and stoned to death.<note place='foot'>Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> φαρμακός,
who says δύο ἄνδρας ᾽Αθήνησιν
ἐξῆγον καθάρσια ἐσομένους τῆς πόλεως ἐν
τοῖς Θαργηλίοις, ἕνα μὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀνδρῶν,
ἕνα δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν γυναικῶν. He does not
expressly state that they were put to
death; but as he says that the ceremony
was an imitation of the execution
of a mythical Pharmacus who was
stoned to death, we may infer that the
victims were killed by being stoned.
Suidas (<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> φαρμακός) copies Harpocration.
As to the human scapegoats
employed by the Greeks at the Thargelia
and on other occasions see W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1884), pp. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J.
Töpffer, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur griechischen
Altertumswissenschaft</hi> (Berlin, 1897),
pp. 130 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste
der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), pp. 468 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss J. E.
Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study of
Greek Religion</hi>, Second Edition (Cambridge,
1908), pp. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. P.
Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi> (Leipsic,
1906), pp. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. R. Paton,
<q>The φαρμακοί and the Story of the
Fall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Archéologique</hi>, iv. Série ix.
(1907) pp. 51-57.</note> The city of
Abdera in Thrace was publicly purified once a year, and one
of the burghers, set apart for the purpose, was stoned to death
as a scapegoat or vicarious sacrifice for the life of all the
others; six days before his execution he was excommunicated,
<q>in order that he alone might bear the sins of all the
people.</q><note place='foot'><p>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Ibis</hi>, 467 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Aut te devoveat certis Abdera diebus<lb/>
Saxaque devotum grandine plura petant</hi>,</q>
</p>
<p>
with the two scholia quoted respectively
by M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische
Feste</hi>, p. 108 note 6, and by O.
Schneider, in his <hi rend='italic'>Callimachea</hi> (Leipsic,
1870-1873), ii. 684. The scholiast
refers to Callimachus as his authority.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
human
scapegoats
in Leucadia. Human
scapegoats
annually
put to
death at
the festival
of the
Thargelia
in Asia
Minor.</note>
From the Lover's Leap, a white bluff at the southern
end of their island, the Leucadians used annually to hurl a
criminal into the sea as a scapegoat. But to lighten his
fall they fastened live birds and feathers to him, and a
flotilla of small boats waited below to catch him and convey
him beyond the boundary. Probably these humane precautions
were a mitigation of an earlier custom of flinging
the scapegoat into the sea to drown, just as in Kumaon the
custom of letting a man slide down a rope from the top of
a cliff appears to be a modification of an older practice of
putting him to death. The Leucadian ceremony took place
at the time of a sacrifice to Apollo, who had a temple or
sanctuary on the spot.<note place='foot'>Strabo, x. 2. 9, p. 542; Photius,
<hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Λευκάτης; L. Ampelius,
<hi rend='italic'>Liber Memorialis</hi>, viii. 4; Servius, on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 279; Ptolemaeus
Hephaest., <hi rend='italic'>Nov. Histor.</hi> in Photius,
<hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, cod. 190, p. 153, ed. Im.
Bekker; <hi rend='italic'>Mythographi Graeci</hi>, ed. A.
Westermann (Brunswick, 1843), pp.
198 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to the manuscript
reading in Photius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, the priests
flung themselves into the sea; but the
reading has been altered by the editors.
As to the Kumaon ceremony see above,
pp. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Elsewhere it was customary to cast
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
a young man every year into the sea, with the prayer, <q>Be
thou our offscouring.</q> This ceremony was supposed to rid
the people of the evils by which they were beset, or according
to a somewhat different interpretation it redeemed them
by paying the debt they owed to the sea-god.<note place='foot'>Suidas and Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
περίψημα. The word which I have
translated <q>offscouring</q> (περίψημα)
occurs in 1 Corinthians iv. 13, where
it is similarly translated in the English
version. It means properly that on
which something is wiped off, like a
sponge or a duster.</note> As practised
by the Greeks of Asia Minor in the sixth century before our
era, the custom of the scapegoat was as follows. When a
city suffered from plague, famine, or other public calamity,
an ugly or deformed person was chosen to take upon himself
all the evils which afflicted the community. He was brought
to a suitable place, where dried figs, a barley loaf, and cheese
were put into his hand. These he ate. Then he was beaten
seven times upon his genital organs with squills and
branches of the wild fig and other wild trees, while the flutes
played a particular tune. Afterwards he was burned on a
pyre built of the wood of forest trees; and his ashes were
cast into the sea.<note place='foot'>J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Chiliades</hi>, v. 726-761
(ed. Th. Kiesseling, Leipsic, 1826).
Tzetzes's authority is the satirical poet
Hipponax. The tune which was played
by the flutes while the man was being
beaten is mentioned by Hesychius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Κραδίης νόμος. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
Κραδησίτης; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De musica</hi>, 8.</note> A similar custom appears to have been
annually celebrated by the Asiatic Greeks at the harvest
festival of the Thargelia.<note place='foot'>This may be inferred from the verse
of Hipponax, quoted by Athenaeus, ix.
9, p. 370 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, where for φαρμάκου we
should perhaps read φαρμακοῦ with
Schneidewin (<hi rend='italic'>Poetae lyrici Graeci</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> ed.
Th. Bergk, ii. 763).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mannhardt's
interpretation
of the
custom of
beating
the human
scapegoat
on the
genitals:
it was
intended
to free
his reproductive
energies
from any
restraint
laid on
them by
demoniacal
or other
malignant
agency.</note>
In the ritual just described the scourging of the victim
with squills, branches of the wild fig, and so forth, cannot
have been intended to aggravate his sufferings, otherwise any
stick would have been good enough to beat him with. The
true meaning of this part of the ceremony has been explained
by W. Mannhardt.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1884), pp. 113
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, especially 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 133.</note> He points out that the ancients
attributed to squills a magical power of averting evil influences,
and that accordingly they hung them up at the doors
of their houses and made use of them in purificatory rites.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xx. 101;
Dioscorides, <hi rend='italic'>De materia medica</hi>, ii. 202;
Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Necyom.</hi> 7; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, Alexander,
47; Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitious Man</hi>.</note>
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
Hence the Arcadian custom of whipping the image of Pan
with squills at a festival, or whenever the hunters returned
empty-handed,<note place='foot'>Theocritus, vii. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> with the
scholiast.</note> must have been meant, not to punish the
god, but to purify him from the harmful influences which
were impeding him in the exercise of his divine functions
as a god who should supply the hunter with game.
Similarly the object of beating the human scapegoat on the
genital organs with squills and so on, must have been to
release his reproductive energies from any restraint or spell
under which they might be laid by demoniacal or other
malignant agency; and as the Thargelia at which he was
annually sacrificed was an early harvest festival celebrated
in May,<note place='foot'>Compare Aug. Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>
(Leipsic, 1864), pp. 414 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi>
(Leipsic, 1898), pp. 468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 479 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 105, iii <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi> (Berlin, 1877), p. 215.</note> we must recognize in him a representative of the
creative and fertilizing god of vegetation. The representative
of the god was annually slain for the purpose I have indicated,
that of maintaining the divine life in perpetual vigour,
untainted by the weakness of age; and before he was put
to death it was not unnatural to stimulate his reproductive
powers in order that these might be transmitted in full
activity to his successor, the new god or new embodiment of
the old god, who was doubtless supposed immediately to
take the place of the one slain.<note place='foot'>At certain sacrifices in Yucatan
blood was drawn from the genitals of a
human victim and smeared on the face
of the idol. See Diego de Landa,
<hi rend='italic'>Relation des choses de Yucatan</hi>, texte
espagnol et traduction française par
l'Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg (Paris,
1864), p. 167. Was the original intention
of this rite to transfuse into
the god a fresh supply of reproductive
energy?</note> Similar reasoning would
lead to a similar treatment of the scapegoat on special
occasions, such as drought or famine. If the crops did not
answer to the expectation of the husbandman, this would be
attributed to some failure in the generative powers of the
god whose function it was to produce the fruits of the earth.
It might be thought that he was under a spell or was growing
old and feeble. Accordingly he was slain in the person
of his representative, with all the ceremonies already described,
in order that, born young again, he might infuse his own
youthful vigour into the stagnant energies of nature. On the
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
same principle we can understand why Mamurius Veturius
was beaten with rods, why the slave at the Chaeronean
ceremony was beaten with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agnus castus</foreign> (a tree to which
magical properties were ascribed),<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> ix. 26.</note> why the effigy of Death
in some parts of Europe is assailed with sticks and
stones,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and why at Babylon the criminal who played the
god was scourged before he was crucified.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 114.</note> The purpose of
the scourging was not to intensify the agony of the divine
sufferer, but on the contrary to dispel any malignant influences
by which at the supreme moment he might conceivably
be beset.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>W. R.
Paton's
view that
the human
scapegoats
at the
Thargelia
personated
the spirits
of fig-trees,
and that
the ceremony
was
a magical
rite for the
fertilization
of fig-trees,
being
copied
from the
process of
caprification.</note>
Thus far I have assumed that the human victims at the
Thargelia represented the spirits of vegetation in general,<note place='foot'>On the other hand, W. Mannhardt
regarded the victims as representing the
demons of infertility, dearth, and sickness,
who in the persons of their representatives
were thus hounded with blows
out of the city. See his <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 129.</note>
but it has been well remarked by Mr. W. R. Paton that
these poor wretches seem to have masqueraded as the
spirits of fig-trees in particular. He points out that the
process of caprification, as it is called, that is, the artificial
fertilization of the cultivated fig-trees by hanging strings of
wild figs among the boughs, takes place in Greece and
Asia Minor in June about a month after the date of the
Thargelia, and he suggests that the hanging of the black
and white figs round the necks of the two human victims,
one of whom represented the men and the other the women,
may have been a direct imitation of the process of caprification
designed, on the principle of imitative magic, to
assist the fertilization of the fig-trees. And since caprification
is in fact a marriage of the male fig-tree with the
female fig-tree, Mr. Paton further supposes that the loves of
the trees may, on the same principle of imitative magic, have
been simulated by a mock or even a real marriage between
the two human victims, one of whom appears sometimes to
have been a woman. On this view the practice of beating
the human victims on their genitals with branches of wild
fig-trees and with squills was a charm intended to stimulate
the generative powers of the man and woman who for the
time being personated the male and the female fig-trees
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
respectively, and who by their union in marriage, whether
real or pretended, were believed to help the trees to bear
fruit.<note place='foot'>W. R. Paton, <q>The φαρμακοί and
the Story of the Fall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Archéologique</hi>,
iv. Série, ix. (1907) pp. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This
theory is
confirmed
by a comparison
with the
Roman
rites of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonae
Caprotinae</foreign>.</note>
The theory is ingenious and attractive; and to some
extent it is borne out by the Roman celebration of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonae Caprotinae</foreign>, which I have described in an earlier part
of this work.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> For on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonae Caprotinae</foreign>, the ninth of
July, the female slaves, in the attire of free women, feasted
under a wild fig-tree, cut a rod from the tree, beat each other,
perhaps with the rod, and offered the milky juice of the tree
to the goddess Juno Caprotina, whose surname seems to point
her out as the goddess of the wild fig-tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caprificus</foreign>). Here
the rites performed in July by women under the wild fig-tree,
which the ancients rightly regarded as a male and
employed to fertilize the cultivated female fig-tree, can hardly
be dissociated from the caprification or artificial marriage of
the fig-trees which, according to Columella, was best performed
in July; and if the blows which the women gave
each other on this occasion were administered, as seems
highly probable, by the rod which they cut from the wild
fig-tree, the parallel between the Roman and the Greek
ceremony would be still closer; since the Greeks, as we saw,
beat the genitals of the human victims with branches of wild
fig-trees. It is true that the human sacrifices, which formed
so prominent a feature in the Greek celebration of the
Thargelia, do not figure in the Roman celebration of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonae
Caprotinae</foreign> within historical times; yet a trace of them may
perhaps be detected in the tradition that Romulus himself
mysteriously disappeared on that very day in the midst of
a tremendous thunder-storm, while he was reviewing his
army outside the walls of Rome at the Goat's Marsh (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad
Caprae paludem</foreign></q>), a name which suggests that the place was
not far distant from the wild fig-tree or the goat-fig (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caprificus</foreign>),
as the Romans called it, where the slave women performed
their curious ceremonies. The legend that he was
cut in pieces by the patricians, who carried away the morsels
of his body under their robes and buried them in the earth,<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquitates
Romanae</hi>, ii. 56. 4. Compare
Livy, i. 16. 4; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Romulus</hi>, 27.</note>
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
exactly describes the treatment which the Khonds used to
accord to the bodies of the human victims for the purpose of
fertilizing their fields.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 248. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis,
Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Can the king have played at Rome
the same fatal part in the fertilization of fig-trees which, if
Mr. Paton is right, was played in Greece by the male victim?
The traditionary time, place, and manner of his death all
suggest it. So many coincidences between the Greek and
Roman ceremonies and traditions can hardly be wholly
accidental; and accordingly I incline to think that there
may well be an element of truth in Mr. Paton's theory,
though it must be confessed that the ancient writers who
describe the Greek custom appear to regard it merely as a
purification of the city and not at all as a mode of fertilizing
fig-trees.<note place='foot'>See, for example, Helladius, cited
by Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, p. 534 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, ed.
Im. Bekker, καὶ ἐκράτει τὸ ἔθος ἀεὶ
καθαίρειν τὴν πόλιν τοῖς φαρμακοῖς;
Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> φαρμακός (vol. i.
p. 298, ed. G. Dindorf), δύο ἄνδρας
Ἀθήνησιν ἐξῆγον καθάρσια ἐσομένους τῆς
πόλεως; Scholiast on Aristophanes,
<hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi>, 1136, δημοσίους δέ, τοὺς
λεγομένους φαρμακούς, οἵπερ καθαίρουσι
τὰς πόλεις τῷ ἑαυτῶν φόνῳ.</note> In similar ceremonies, which combine the elements
of purification and fertilization, the notion of purification
apparently tends gradually to overshadow the notion of
fertilization in the minds of those who practise the rites.
It seems to have been so in the case of the annual
expulsion of Mamurius Veturius from ancient Rome and in
the parallel processions of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in modern Europe;
it may have been so also in the case of the human sacrifices
at the Thargelia.<note place='foot'>Mr. Paton ingeniously suggests
that in the Biblical narrative of
Adam and Eve, who for eating a
particular fruit were condemned to death
and driven out of the happy garden
with aprons of fig-leaves about their
loins (Genesis iii.), we have a reminiscence
of a custom of fertilizing
fig-trees by a pair of human scapegoats,
who, like the victims at the Thargelia,
assimilated themselves to the tree by
wearing its foliage or fruit. See W. R.
Paton, <q>The φαρμακοί and the Story
of the Fall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Archéologique</hi>, iv.
Série, ix. (1907) pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beating
as a mode
of dispelling
evil
influences.</note>
The interpretation which I have adopted of the custom of
beating the human scapegoat with certain plants is supported
by many analogies. We have already met with examples of
a practice of beating sick people with the leaves of certain
plants or with branches in order to rid them of noxious
influences.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>. Compare
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Parallela</hi>, 35, where a woman
is represented as going from house to
house striking sick people with a hammer
and bidding them be whole.</note> Some of the Dravidian tribes of Northern India,
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
who attribute epilepsy, hysteria, and similar maladies to
demoniacal possession, endeavour to cure the sufferer by
thrashing him soundly with a sacred iron chain, which is
believed to have the effect of immediately expelling the
demon.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 99, 155; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes
and Castes of the North-Western Provinces
and Oudh</hi> (Calcutta, 1896), iii.
333, 441, 445.</note> When a herd of camels refuses to drink, the Arabs
will sometimes beat the male beasts on the back to drive
away the jinn who are riding them and frightening the
females.<note place='foot'>A. Certeux et E. H. Carnoy,
<hi rend='italic'>L'Algérie Traditionnelle</hi> (Paris and
Algiers, 1884), p. 189.</note> In Bikol, the south-western part of Luzon, it was
generally believed that if the evil spirit Aswang were not
properly exorcised he took possession of the bodies of the
dead and tormented them. Hence to deliver a corpse from
his clutches the native priestesses used to beat it with a
brush or whisk made of the leaves of the aromatic China
orange, while they chanted a certain song, throwing their
bodies into contortions and uttering shrill cries, as if the evil
spirit had entered into themselves. The soul of the deceased,
thus delivered from the cruel tyranny of Aswang, was then
free to roam at pleasure along the charming lanes or in the
thick shade of the forest.<note place='foot'>H. Kern, <q>Een Spanisch schrijver
over den godsdienst der heidensche
Bikollers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlvii. (1897) pp. 232
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Spanish authority is Father
José Castaño. An ancient Egyptian
relief from Saqqarah represents a
mummy at the entrance of the tomb,
while the women tear out their hair
and the men wave palm-branches,
apparently to drive evil spirits away.
The custom has been inherited by the
modern Arabs, who similarly beat off
the invisible foes with palm-branches.
See A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Herodots Zweites
Buch</hi> (Leipsic, 1890), p. 347. However,
in these cases the blows seem to
be administered to the demons and not
to the corpse.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beating
people to
rid them
of clinging
ghosts. Exorcism
of ghosts
by means
of leaves
and pig's
blood.</note>
Sometimes it appears that a beating is administered for
the purpose of ridding people of a ghost who may be clinging
too closely to their persons; in such cases the blows,
though they descend on the bodies of the living, are really
aimed at the spirit of the dead, and have no other object
than to drive it away, just as a coachman will flick the back
of a horse with his whip to rid the beast of a fly. At a
funeral in the island of Halmahera, before the coffin is
lowered into the grave, all the relations whip themselves on
the head and shoulders with wands made of plants which
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
are believed to possess the power of keeping off evil spirits.
The intention of the custom is said to be to bring back their
own spectres or souls and to prevent them from following
the ghost; but this may fairly be interpreted to mean that
the blows are directed to brushing off the ghost, who would
otherwise abstract the soul of the person on whose body he
was allowed to settle. This interpretation is strongly confirmed
by the practice, observed by the same people on the
same occasion, of throwing the trunk of a banana-tree into
the grave, and telling the dead man that it is a companion
for him; for this practice is expressly intended to prevent
the deceased from feeling lonely, and so coming back to
fetch away a friend.<note place='foot'>J. M. van Baarda, <q>Ile de Halmaheira,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletins de la Société d'Anthropologie
de Paris</hi>, Quatrième Série,
iii. (1892) p. 545. As to throwing a
banana-trunk into the grave, see <hi rend='italic'>Spirits
of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, ii. 97.</note> When Mr. Batchelor returned to a
hut after visiting the grave of an old Aino woman, her
relations brought him a bowl of water to the door and
requested him to wash his face and hands. While he did
so, the women beat him and brushed him down with sacred
whittled sticks (<foreign rend='italic'>inao</foreign>). On enquiring into the meaning of
this treatment, he discovered that it was intended to purify
him from all uncleanness contracted at the grave through
contact with the ghost of the deceased, and that the beating
and brushing with the whittled sticks had for its object to
drive away all evil influences and diseases with which the
ghost of the old woman might have attempted to infect him
out of spite for his trespassing on her domain.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), p. 550.</note> The Banmanas
of Senegambia think that the soul of a dead infant
becomes for a time a wandering and maleficent spirit.
Accordingly when a baby dies, all the uncircumcised children
of the same sex in the village run about the streets in a
band, each armed with three or four supple rods. Some of
them enter every house to beg, and while they are doing so,
one of the troop, propping himself against the wall with his
hands, is lashed by another of the children on his back or
legs till the blood flows. Each of the children takes it in
turn to be thus whipped. The object of the whipping, we
are told, <q>appears to be to preserve the uncircumcised child
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
from being carried off by its comrade who has just died.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, iii. (1885)
pp. 395 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The severe scourgings inflicted on each other by some South
American Indians at ceremonies connected with the dead
may be similarly intended to chase away the dangerous
ghost, who is conceived as sticking like a leech or a bur
to the skin of the living.<note place='foot'>R. Schomburgk, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in
Britisch-Guiana</hi> (Leipsic, 1847-1848),
ii. 457 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Rev. J. H. Bernau,
<hi rend='italic'>Missionary Labours in British Guiana</hi>
(London, 1847), p. 52; C. F. Ph. von
Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie Amerika's,
zumal Brasiliens</hi> (Leipsic, 1867), pp.
694 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Crevaux, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans
l'Amérique du Sud</hi> (Paris, 1883), p.
548.</note> The ancient Greeks employed
the laurel very commonly as an instrument of ceremonial
purification;<note place='foot'>Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. 329.
For more evidence see C. Boetticher,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</hi> (Berlin,
1856), pp. 369 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and from the monuments which represent the
purgation of Orestes from the guilt of matricide<note place='foot'>See my note on Pausanias, ii. 31.
8, vol. ii. pp. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> it seems
probable that the regular rite of cleansing a homicide consisted
essentially in sprinkling him with pig's blood and
beating him with a laurel bough, for the purpose, as we may
conjecture, of whisking away the wrathful ghost of his victim,
who was thought to buzz about him like an angry wasp
in summer. If that was so, the Greek ritual of purification
singularly resembles the Nicobarese ceremony of exorcism;
for when a man is supposed to be possessed by devils, the
Nicobarese rub him all over with pig's blood and beat him
with bunches of certain leaves, to which a special power of
exorcising demons is attributed. As fast as each devil is
thus disengaged from his person, it is carefully folded up
in leaves, to be afterwards thrown into the sea at daybreak.<note place='foot'>V. Solomon, <q>Extracts from
Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) p. 227.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beating
practised
by South
American
Indians
and others
as a mode
of conveying
good
qualities.</note>
At the autumn festival in Peru people used to strike
each other with torches, saying, <q>Let all harm go
away.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Indies</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 375 (Hakluyt Society, London,
1880). See above, pp. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Every year when the Pleiades reappeared in the
sky, the Guaycurus, an Indian nation of the Gran Chaco,
held a festival of rejoicing, at which men, women, and
children all thrashed each other, expecting thereby to procure
health, abundance, and victory over their enemies.<note place='foot'>P. Lozano, <hi rend='italic'>Descripcion Chorographica
del terreno, rios, arboles, y
animales de las dilatadissimas provincias
del Gran Chaco, Gualamba</hi>,
etc. (Cordova, 1733), p. 67. The
reappearance of the Pleiades probably
marked the beginning of the year for
these people. See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn
and of the Wild</hi>, i. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
Indians of the Quixos, in South America, before they set
out on a long hunting expedition, cause their wives to whip
them with nettles, believing that this renders them fleeter,
and helps them to overtake the peccaries. They resort to
the same proceeding as a cure for sickness.<note place='foot'>G. Osculati, <hi rend='italic'>Esplorazione delle
regioni equatoriali lungo il Napo ed il
fiume delle Amazzoni</hi> (Milan, 1850),
p. 118.</note> The Roocooyen
Indians of French Guiana train up young people in the way
they should go by causing them to be stung by ants and
wasps; and at the ceremony held for this purpose the
grown-up people improve the occasion by allowing themselves
to be whacked by the chief with a stick over the arms,
the legs, and the chest. They appear to labour under an
impression that this conveys to them all sorts of moral and
physical excellences. One of the tribe, ambitious of acquiring
the European virtues, begged a French traveller to be so
kind as to give him a good hiding. The traveller obligingly
did his best to gratify him, and the face of the Indian
beamed with gratitude as the blows fell on his naked back.<note place='foot'>H. Coudreau, <hi rend='italic'>Chez nos Indiens:
quatre années dans la Guyane Française</hi>
(Paris, 1895), p. 544.</note>
The Delaware Indians had two sovereign remedies for sin;
one was an emetic, the other a thrashing. In the latter case,
the remedy was administered by means of twelve different
sticks, with which the sinner was belaboured from the soles
of his feet up to his neck. In both cases the sins were
supposed to be expelled from the body, and to pass out
through the throat.<note place='foot'>G. H. Loskiel, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Mission of the United Brethren among
the Indians in North America</hi> (London,
1794), Part i. p. 37.</note> At the inauguration of a king in
ancient India it was customary for the priests to strike him
lightly on the back with sticks. <q>By beating him with
sticks,</q> it was said, <q>they guide him safely over judicial
punishment; whence the king is exempt from punishment,
because they guide him safely over judicial punishment.</q><note place='foot'>The <hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, v. 4.
4. 7, translated by J. Eggeling, Part
iii. (Oxford, 1894) p. 108 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vol. xli.).</note>
On the thirtieth of December the heathen of Harran used to
receive three, five, or seven blows apiece from a priest with a
tamarisk branch. After the beating had been duly administered
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
the priest on behalf of the whole community prayed
for long life, much offspring, power and glory over all peoples,
and the restoration of their ancient kingdom.<note place='foot'>D. Chwolsohn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier und
der Ssabismus</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1856),
ii. 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beating
people
with instruments
which
possess
and impart
special
virtues.</note>
Sometimes, in the opinion of those who resort to it,
the effect of a beating is not merely the negative one
of dispelling demoniac or other baneful influences; it
confers positive benefits by virtue of certain useful properties
supposed to inhere in the instrument with which
the beating is administered.<note place='foot'>On the positive benefits supposed
in certain cases to flow from a beating
compare S. Reinach, <q>La flagellation
rituelle,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cultes, Mythes et Religions</hi>,
i. (Paris, 1905) pp. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. S.
Hartland, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Paternity</hi> (London,
1909-1910), i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus among the Kai of
German New Guinea, when a man wishes to make his
banana shoots bear fruit quickly, he beats them with
a stick cut from a banana-tree which has already borne
fruit.<note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben
der Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) p. 124.</note> Here it is obvious that fruitfulness is believed
to inhere in a stick cut from a fruitful tree and to be
imparted by contact to the young banana plants. Similarly
in New Caledonia a man will beat his taro plants
lightly with a branch, saying as he does so, <q>I beat this
taro that it may grow,</q> after which he plants the branch in
the ground at the end of the field.<note place='foot'>Father Lambert, <q>Mœurs et
Superstitions de la tribu Bélep,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les
Missions Catholique</hi>, xii. (1880) p.
273; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et Superstitions des
Néo-Calédoniens</hi> (Nouméa, 1900), p.
218.</note> Among the Indians of
Brazil at the mouth of the Amazon, when a man wishes to
increase the size of his generative organ, he strikes it with
the fruit of a white aquatic plant called an <foreign rend='italic'>aninga</foreign>, which
grows luxuriantly on the banks of the river. The fruit,
which is inedible, resembles a banana, and is clearly chosen
for this purpose on account of its shape. The ceremony
should be performed three days before or after the new
moon.<note place='foot'>F. J. de Santa-Anna Nery, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
Brésilien</hi> (Paris, 1889), p. 253.</note> In the county of Bekes, in Hungary, barren women
are fertilized by being struck with a stick which has first
been used to separate pairing dogs.<note place='foot'>R. Temesváry, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbräuche und
Aberglauben in der Geburtshilfe und
der Pflege des Neugeborenen in Ungarn</hi>
(Leipsic, 1900), p. 8. Compare E. S.
Hartland, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Paternity</hi> (London,
1909-1910), i. 106.</note> Here a fertilizing virtue
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
is clearly supposed to be inherent in the stick and to be
conveyed by contact to the women. The Toradjas of Central
Celebes think that the plant <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dracaena terminalis</foreign> has a
strong soul, because when it is lopped, it soon grows up
again. Hence when a man is ill, his friends will sometimes
beat him on the crown of the head with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dracaena</foreign> leaves in
order to strengthen his weak soul with the strong soul of the
plant.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruyt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes, en
zijne beteekenis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen
der Koninklijke Akademie
van Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
iv. Reeks, iii. (Amsterdam,
1899) p. 199.</note> At Mowat in British New Guinea small boys are
beaten lightly with sticks during December <q>to make them
grow strong and hardy.</q><note place='foot'>E. Beardmore, <q>The Natives of
Mowat, Daudai, New Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xix. (1890) p. 464.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom in
Morocco
of beating
people
with the
skins of
sacrificed
sheep or
goats.</note>
Among the Arabs of Morocco the Great Feast, which is
the annual sacrificial festival of Mohammedan peoples, is the
occasion when men go about beating people with the kindly
intention of healing or preventing sickness and benefiting
the sufferers generally. In some tribes the operator is
muffled in the bloody skins of sacrificed sheep, and he strikes
everybody within reach of him with a flap of the skin or a
foot of the sheep which dangles loose from his arm; sick
people present themselves to him in order to receive the
health-giving blows, and mothers bring their little children
to him for the same purpose. Anybody whom he hits on
the head will be free from headache. Nor does he confine
his attention to people; he goes about striking the tents
also, in order that they too may receive their share of the
blessed influence (<foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>baraka</foreign>) that radiates like sunshine from a
bloody sheepskin. From the costume which he wears the
masker is known as the <q>Lion with Sheepskins</q>; and he
himself participates in the blessings which he diffuses so
liberally around him. Hence in at least one tribe he is
generally a person who suffers from some illness, because he
expects to be healed by the magic virtue or holiness of the
bloody skins.<note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <q>The Popular
Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xxii. (1911) pp. 163-165.</note> Similarly, as we shall see presently, in
ancient Mexico the men who masqueraded in the skins of
the human victims were commonly persons who suffered
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
from skin disease, because they thought that the bleeding
skin of a man who had been killed in the character of a god
must surely possess a sovereign virtue for the healing of
disease.<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</note> In Morocco the skin-clad mummer sometimes
operates with sticks instead of a flap of the skin, and sometimes
the skins in which he is muffled are those of goats
instead of sheep, but in all cases the effect, or at least the
intention, is probably the same.<note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 165
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 170, 178. The purificatory
character of the rite is duly recognised
by Dr. Westermarck (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 178).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>European
custom
of beating
cattle with
branches
to make
them
healthy
or drive
away the
witches
from them. The
rowan-tree
as a protection
against
witchcraft.</note>
In some parts of Eastern and Central Europe a similar
custom is very commonly observed in spring. On the first
of March the Albanians strike men and beast with cornel
branches, believing that this is very good for their health.<note place='foot'>J. G. v. Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische Studien</hi>
(Jena, 1854), i. 155.</note>
In March the Greek peasants of Cos switch their cattle,
saying, <q>It is March, and up with your tail!</q> They think
that the ceremony benefits the animals, and brings good
luck. It is never observed at any other time of the year.<note place='foot'>W. H. D. Rouse, <q>Folk-lore from
the Southern Sporades,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, x.
(1899) p. 179.</note>
In some parts of Mecklenburg it is customary to beat the
cattle before sunrise on the morning of Good Friday with
rods of buckthorn, which are afterwards concealed in some
secret place where neither sun nor moon can shine on them.
The belief is that though the blows light upon the animals,
the pain of them is felt by the witches who are riding the
beasts.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1880), ii. p. 258, § 1348.</note> In the neighbourhood of Iserlohn, in Westphalia,
the herdsman rises at peep of dawn on May morning, climbs
a hill, and cuts down the young rowan-tree which is the first
to catch the beams of the rising sun. With this he returns
to the farm-yard. The heifer which the farmer desires to
<q>quicken</q> is then led to the dunghill, and the herdsman
strikes it over the hind-quarters, the haunches, and the
udders with a branch of the rowan-tree, saying,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Quick, quick, quick!</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bring milk into the dugs.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The sap is in the birches.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The heifer receives a name.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Quick, quick, quick!</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bring milk into the dugs.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The sap comes in the beeches,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The leaf comes on the oak.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Quick, quick, quick!</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bring milk into the dugs.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>In the name of the sainted Greta,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Gold-flower shall be thy name,</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
and so on.<note place='foot'>J. F. L. Woeste, <hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen
in der Grafschaft Mark</hi>
(Iserlohn, 1848), pp. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Kuhn,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des
Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh, 1886), pp.
161 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The ceremony takes its
name of <q>quickening</q> from <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Quieke</foreign> or
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Quickenbaum</foreign>, a German name for the
rowan-tree. Quicken-tree is also an
English name for the rowan.</note> The intention of the ceremony appears to be
to make sure that the heifer shall in due time yield a
plentiful supply of milk; and this is perhaps supposed to
be brought about by driving away the witches, who are
particularly apt, as we have seen,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> to rob the cows of their
milk on the morning of May Day. Certainly in the north-east
of Scotland pieces of rowan-tree and woodbine used to
be placed over the doors of the byres on May Day to keep
the witches from the cows; sometimes a single rod of rowan,
covered with notches, was found to answer the purpose.
An even more effectual guard against witchcraft was to tie
a small cross of rowan-wood by a scarlet thread to each
beast's tail; hence people said,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Rawn-tree in red-threed</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Pits the witches t' their speed.</hi></q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the
Folk-lore of the North-east of Scotland</hi>
(London, 1881), p. 188.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In Germany also the rowan-tree is a protection against
witchcraft;<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 106,
§ 145.</note> and Norwegian sailors and fishermen carry a
piece of it in their boats for good luck.<note place='foot'>J. F. L. Woeste, <hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen
in der Grafschaft Mark</hi>
(Iserlohn, 1848), p. 26. Compare
A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des Feuers
und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh, 1886),
p. 179.</note> Thus the benefit
to young cows of beating them with rowan appears to be
not so much the positive one of pouring milk into their
udders, as merely the negative one of averting evil influence;
and the same may perhaps be said of most of the beatings
with which we are here concerned.
</p>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>European
custom of
beating
people with
branches
at Easter
to do them
good:
<q>Easter
Smacks.</q></note>
On Good Friday and the two previous days people in
Croatia and Slavonia take rods with them to church, and
when the service is over they beat each other <q>fresh and
healthy.</q><note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Kroatien und
Slavonien</hi> (Vienna, 1889), p. 108.</note> In some parts of Russia people returning from
the church on Palm Sunday beat the children and servants
who have stayed at home with palm branches, saying, <q>Sickness
into the forest, health into the bones.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
257.</note> A similar
custom is widely known under the name of <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Schmeckostern</foreign> or
<q>Easter Smacks</q> in some parts of Germany and Austria.
The regions in which the practice prevails are for the most
part districts in which the people either are or once were
predominantly of Slavonic blood, such as East and West
Prussia, Voigtland, Silesia, Bohemia, and Moravia. While
the German population call the custom <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Schmeckostern</foreign>, the
Slavonic inhabitants give it, according to their particular
language or dialect, a variety of names which signify to beat
or scourge. It is usually observed on Easter Monday, less
frequently on Easter Saturday or Easter Sunday. Troops
of boys or lads go from house to house on the morning of
Easter Monday beating every girl or woman whom they
meet; they even make their way into the bedrooms, and if
they find any girls or women still abed, they compel them
with blows to get up. Even grown-up men indulge themselves
in the pastime of going to the houses of friends and
relations to inflict the <q>Easter Smacks.</q> In some places,
for example in the Leobschütz district of Silesia, the boys
and men further claim and exercise the right of drenching
all the girls and women with water on Easter Monday; and
for this purpose they generally go about armed with squirts,
which are not always charged with eau de Cologne. Next
day, Easter Tuesday, the women have the right to retaliate
on the men; however, they do not as a rule go about the
streets but confine their operations to their own houses,
beating and chasing from their beds any lads or men they
can find lying in them. Children are less discriminating in
their <q>Easter Smacks,</q> which they bestow impartially on
parents and relations, friends and strangers, without observing
the subtle distinction of sex. In many places it is only
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
the women who are privileged to receive the smacks. The
instrument with which the beating is administered is in some
districts, such as Lithuania, Samland, and Neumark, a twig
or branch of birch on which the fresh green leaves have just
sprouted. If the birch-trees have not budded in time, it is
customary to keep the rods in pickle for days or even weeks,
nursing them tenderly in warm water; and if that measure
also fails, they are heated in the stove-pipe. But more
commonly the instrument of torture is a branch of willow
with catkins on it, which has also been nursed in warm water
or the chimney so as to be ripe for execution on Easter
Monday. A number of these birch or willow twigs are
usually tied together into a switch, and ornamented with
motley ribbons and pieces of silk paper, so that they present
the appearance of a nosegay; indeed, in northern Bohemia
spring flowers form part of the decoration. In some places,
particularly in Silesia and Moravia, pieces of licorice root are
substituted for willow twigs; or again in the vine-growing
districts of Bohemia vine-branches are used for the same
purpose. Sometimes a scourge made of leather straps of
various colours takes the place of a green bough. The
blows are commonly inflicted on the hands and feet; and
in some places, particularly in Bohemia, the victims are
expected to reward their tormentors with a present of red
Easter eggs; nay sometimes a woman is bound to give an
egg for every blow she receives. In the afternoon the lads
carry their eggs to high ground and let them roll down the
slope; he whose egg reaches the bottom first, wins all the
rest. The beating is supposed to bring good luck to the
beaten, or to warrant them against flies and vermin during
the summer, or to save them from pains in their back
throughout the whole year. At Gilgenburg in Masuren the
rods or bundles of twigs are afterwards laid by and used to
drive the cattle out to pasture for the first time after their
winter confinement.<note place='foot'>Th. Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</hi>
(Vienna, 1859), pp. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; O.
Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi> (Prague,
preface dated 1861), pp. 163-167; A.
Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</hi>
(Troppau, 1865-1867),
ii. 285; J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre
alte Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi>
(Leipsic, 1867), pp. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; M.
Toeppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>,
(Danzig, 1867), pp. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Wuttke,
<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1869), p. 70, § 83; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus</hi> (Berlin, 1875),
pp. 258-263; W. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge
zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in
Mähren</hi> (Vienna and Olmütz, 1893),
pp. 322, 399 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Dr. F. Tetzner,
<q>Die Tschechen und Mährer in
Schlesien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxviii. (1900) p.
340; P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic,
1903-1906), pp. 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Alois John,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauche und Volksglaube im
deutschen Westböhmen</hi> (Prague, 1905),
pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mannhardt's whole discussion
of what he calls <q>the Blow
with the Rod of Life</q> (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Der Schlag
mit der Lebensrute</foreign></q>) deserves to be
studied. See his <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
251-303; and compare his treatment
of the same theme, <q>Der Schlag mit
dem Februum,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1884), pp. 113-153.
The custom of <q>Easter Smacks</q>
can be traced back to the twelfth
century, when the practice was for
women to beat their husbands on
Easter Monday and for husbands to
retaliate on their wives on Easter
Tuesday. See J. Belethus, <hi rend='italic'>Rationale
Divinorum Officiorum</hi>, cap. 120, appended
to G. Durandus's <hi rend='italic'>Rationale
Divinorum Officiorum</hi> (Lyons, 1584),
p. 546 recto: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Notandum quoque est
in plerisque regionibus secundo die post
Pascha mulieres maritos suos verberare,
ac vicissim viros eas tertio die quemadmodum
licebat servis in Decembri
dominos suos impune accusare.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>European
custom of
beating
people with
branches
in the
Christmas
holidays
(Holy
Innocents'
Day, etc.)
to do them
good.</note>
In some parts of Germany and Austria a custom like
that of <q>Easter Smacks</q> is observed at the Christmas
holidays, especially on Holy Innocents' Day, the twenty-eighth
of December. Young men and women beat each
other mutually, but on different days, with branches of
fresh green, whether birch, willow, or fir. Thus, for
example, among the Germans of western Bohemia it is
customary on St. Barbara's Day (the fourth of December)
to cut twigs or branches of birch and to steep them in
water in order that they may put out leaves or buds. They
are afterwards used by each sex to beat the other on
subsequent days of the Christmas holidays. In some
villages branches of willow or cherry-trees or rosemary are
employed for the same purpose. With these green boughs,
sometimes tied in bundles with red or green ribbons, the
young men go about beating the young women on the
morning of St. Stephen's Day (the twenty-sixth of December)
and also on Holy Innocents' Day (the twenty-eighth of
December). The beating is inflicted on the hands, feet, and
face; and in Neugramatin it is said that she who is not thus
beaten with fresh green will not herself be fresh and green.
As the blows descend, the young men recite verses importing
that the beating is administered as a compliment and in
order to benefit the health of the victim. For the service
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
which they thus render the damsels they are rewarded by
them with cakes, brandy, or money. Early in the morning
of New Year's Day the lasses pay off the lads in the same
kind.<note place='foot'>Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), pp. 5, 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 25, 28.
Compare Th. Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</hi>
(Vienna, 1859), pp. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A similar custom is also observed in central and
south-west Germany, especially in Voigtland. Thus in
Voigtland and the whole of the Saxon Erz-gebirge the lads
beat the lasses and women on the second day of the Christmas
holidays with something green, such as rosemary or
juniper; and if possible the beating is inflicted on the women
as they lie in bed. As they beat them, the lads say
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Fresh and green! Pretty and fine!</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Gingerbread and brandy-wine!</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The last words refer to the present of gingerbread and brandy
which the lads expect to receive from the lasses for the
trouble of thrashing them. Next day the lasses and women
retaliate on the lads and men.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch, Aberglauben,
Sagen und andre alte Überlieferungen
im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic,
1867), p. 174; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
pp. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Thüringen on Holy
Innocents' Day (the twenty-eighth of December) children
armed with rods and green boughs go about the streets
beating passers-by and demanding a present in return; they
even make their way into the houses and beat the maid-servants.
In Orlagau the custom is called <q>whipping with
fresh green.</q> On the second day of the Christmas holidays
the girls go to their parents, godparents, relations, and
friends, and beat them with fresh green branches of fir; next
day the boys and lads do the same. The words spoken
while the beating is being administered are <q>Good morning!
fresh green! Long life! You must give us a bright
thaler,</q> and so on.<note place='foot'>August Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), pp. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 265. Compare G.
Bilfinger, <hi rend='italic'>Unterschungen über die
Zeitrechnung der alten Germanen</hi>, ii.,
<hi rend='italic'>Das Germanische Julfest</hi> (Stuttgart,
1901), pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
intention
of beating
people with
fresh green
leaves is
to renew
their life
and vigour.</note>
In these European customs the intention of beating
persons, especially of the other sex, with fresh green leaves
appears unquestionably to be the beneficent one of renewing
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
their life and vigour, whether the purpose is supposed to be
accomplished directly and positively by imparting the vital
energy of the fresh green to the persons, or negatively and
indirectly by dispelling any injurious influences, such as the
machinations of witches and demons, by which the persons
may be supposed to be beset. The application of the blows
by the one sex to the other, especially by young men to
young women, suggests that the beating is or was originally
intended above all to stimulate the reproductive powers of
the men or women who received it; and the pains taken
to ensure that the branches with which the strokes are
given should have budded or blossomed out just before their
services are wanted speak strongly in favour of the view that
in these customs we have a deliberate attempt to transfuse a
store of vital energy from the vegetable to the animal world.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
custom of
beating
the human
victims
at the
Thargelia
with fig-branches
and squills
was probably
a
charm to
increase
their reproductive
energies.</note>
These analogies, accordingly, support the interpretation
which, following my predecessors W. Mannhardt and Mr.
W. R. Paton, I have given of the beating inflicted on the
human victims at the Greek harvest festival of the Thargelia.
That beating, being administered to the generative organs of
the victims by fresh green plants and branches, is most
naturally explained as a charm to increase the reproductive
energies of the men or women either by communicating to
them the fruitfulness of the plants and branches, or by ridding
them of maleficent influences; and this interpretation is confirmed
by the observation that the two victims represented
the two sexes, one of them standing for the men in general
and the other for the women. The season of the year when
the ceremony was performed, namely the time of the corn
harvest, tallies well with the theory that the rite had an
agricultural significance. Further, that it was above all
intended to fertilize the fig-trees is strongly suggested by the
strings of black and white figs which were hung round the
necks of the victims, as well as by the blows which were
given their genital organs with the branches of a wild fig-tree;
since this procedure closely resembles the procedure
which ancient and modern husbandmen in Greek lands have
regularly resorted to for the purpose of actually fertilizing
their fig-trees. When we remember what an important
part the artificial fertilization of the date palm-tree appears
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
to have played of old not only in the husbandry but in the
religion of Mesopotamia,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 24 sq. It is highly
significant that the heathen of Harran
celebrated the marriage festival of all
the gods and goddesses in the very
month (March) in which the artificial
fertilization of the date-palm was
effected (D. Chwolsohn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier
und der Ssabismus</hi>, St. Petersburg,
1856, ii. 36, 251). The frequency
with which the artificial fertilization of
the palm-tree by a mythical winged
figure is represented on Assyrian
monuments furnishes strong evidence
of the religious and economic importance
of the ceremony.</note> there seems no reason to doubt
that the artificial fertilization of the fig-tree may in like
manner have vindicated for itself a place in the solemn
ritual of Greek religion.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence
the human
victims
at the
Thargelia
may have
primarily
represented
spirits of
vegetation.</note>
If these considerations are just, we must apparently
conclude that while the human victims at the Thargelia
certainly appear in later classical times to have figured
chiefly as public scapegoats, who carried away with them
the sins, misfortunes, and sorrows of the whole people, at an
earlier time they may have been looked on as embodiments
of vegetation, perhaps of the corn but particularly of the fig-trees;
and that the beating which they received and the
death which they died were intended primarily to brace and
refresh the powers of vegetation then beginning to droop
and languish under the torrid heat of the Greek summer.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Parallel
between
the human
sacrifices
at the
Thargelia
and the
bloody
ritual of
the Arician
Grove.</note>
The view here taken of the Greek scapegoat, if it is correct,
obviates an objection which might otherwise be brought
against the main argument of this book. To the theory
that the priest of Aricia was slain as a representative of the
spirit of the grove,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. 376
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> it might have been objected that such a
custom has no analogy in classical antiquity. But reasons
have now been given for believing that the human being
periodically and occasionally slain by the Asiatic Greeks was
regularly treated as an embodiment of a divinity of vegetation.
Probably the persons whom the Athenians kept to be sacrificed
were similarly treated as divine. That they were
social outcasts did not matter. On the primitive view a
man is not chosen to be the mouth-piece or embodiment of
a god on account of his high moral qualities or social rank.
The divine afflatus descends equally on the good and the
bad, the lofty and the lowly. If then the civilized Greeks
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
of Asia and Athens habitually sacrificed men whom they
regarded as incarnate gods, there can be no inherent improbability
in the supposition that at the dawn of history
a similar custom was observed by the semi-barbarous Latins
in the Arician Grove.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Killing the God in Mexico.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
custom of
sacrificing
human
representatives
of
the gods
among the
Aztecs of
Mexico.</note>
By no people does the custom of sacrificing the human
representative of a god appear to have been observed so
commonly and with so much solemnity as by the Aztecs of
ancient Mexico. With the ritual of these remarkable
sacrifices we are well acquainted, for it has been fully
described by the Spaniards who conquered Mexico in the
sixteenth century, and whose curiosity was naturally excited
by the discovery in this distant region of a barbarous and
cruel religion which presented many curious points of
analogy to the doctrine and ritual of their own church.
<q>They took a captive,</q> says the Jesuit Acosta, <q>such as
they thought good; and afore they did sacrifice him unto
their idols, they gave him the name of the idol, to whom he
should be sacrificed, and apparelled him with the same
ornaments like their idol, saying, that he did represent the
same idol. And during the time that this representation
lasted, which was for a year in some feasts, in others six
months, and in others less, they reverenced and worshipped
him in the same manner as the proper idol; and in the
meantime he did eat, drink, and was merry. When he
went through the streets, the people came forth to worship
him, and every one brought him an alms, with children and
sick folks, that he might cure them, and bless them, suffering
him to do all things at his pleasure, only he was accompanied
with ten or twelve men lest he should fly. And he (to the
end he might be reverenced as he passed) sometimes sounded
upon a small flute, that the people might prepare to worship
him. The feast being come, and he grown fat, they killed
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
him, opened him, and ate him, making a solemn sacrifice of
him.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural and
Moral History of the Indies</hi> (London,
Hakluyt Society, 1880), ii. 323. I
have modernized the spelling of the
old English translator, whose version
was originally published in 1604.
Acosta resided both in Peru and
Mexico, and published his work at
Seville in 1590. It was reprinted in a
convenient form at Madrid in 1894.
Compare A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History
of the Vast Continent and Islands
of America</hi>, translated by Captain
John Stevens (London, 1725-1726),
iii. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice
of a man
in the
character
of the
great god
Tezcatlipoca
at
the festival
of Toxcatl
in the
fifth Aztec
month.</note>
This general description of the custom may now be
illustrated by particular examples. Thus at the festival
called Toxcatl, the greatest festival of the Mexican year, a
young man was annually sacrificed in the character of
Tezcatlipoca, <q>the god of gods,</q> after having been maintained
and worshipped as that great deity in person for a whole
year. According to the old Franciscan monk Sahagun, our
best authority on the Aztec religion, the sacrifice of the human
god fell at Easter or a few days later, so that, if he is right,
it would correspond in date as well as in character to the
Christian festival of the death and resurrection of the
Redeemer.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R.
Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>On appelait le cinquième moi</foreign> toxcatl.
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Au premier jour on faisait une
grande fête en l'honneur du dieu appelé</foreign>
Titlacauan, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>autrement dit</foreign> Tezcatlipoca,
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>que l'on croyait être le dieu des dieux.
C'était en son honneur que l'on tuait, le
jour de sa fête, un jeune homme choisi....
Cette fête était la principale de
toutes, comme qui dirait la Pâque, et,
en réalité, elle se célébrait aux environs
de la Pâque de résurrection, ou
quelques jours après</foreign>.</q> Compare J.
de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>,
lib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. p. 256 (Madrid,
1723). As to Tezcatlipoca, the greatest
of the Mexican gods, see J. G. Müller,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen</hi>
(Bâle, 1867), pp. 613 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi> (London, 1875-1876),
iii. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 237 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E.
Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>, ii.
(Berlin, 1899) pp. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen
aus dem königlichen Museum
für Völkerkunde</hi>, vol. vi. Heft 2/4).</note> More exactly he tells us that the sacrifice took
place on the first day of the fifth Aztec month, which
according to him began on the twenty-third or twenty-seventh
day of April.<note place='foot'>On the twenty-third of April according
to the Spanish text of Sahagun's
work as translated in French by
D. Jourdanet and R. Simeon (p. 52);
the twenty-seventh of April according
to the Aztec text of Sahagun's work
as translated into German by Professor
E. Seler (<hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>, ii.
194).</note> However, according to other
Spanish authorities of the sixteenth century the festival
lasted from the ninth to the nineteenth day of May, and
the sacrifice of the human victim in the character of the
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
god was performed on the last of these days.<note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral
History of the Indies</hi> (Hakluyt Society,
London, 1880), ii. 378, 380; Diego
Duran, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de las Indias de
Nueva España</hi> (Mexico, 1867-1880),
ii. 99, 101; <hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire
de l'Origine des Indiens qui
habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon
leurs traditions</hi>, publié par D. Charnay
(Paris, 1903), pp. 159, 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According
to Clavigero, the fifth Mexican
month, in which the sacrifice of the
human representative of Tezcatlipoca
took place, began on the 17th of May
(<hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated by C.
Cullen, London, 1807, i. 299); but
this must be an error.</note> An eminent
modern authority, Professor E. Seler, is of opinion that the
festival originally celebrated the beginning of the year, and
that it fell on the day when the sun on his passage northward
to the tropic of Cancer stood in the zenith over the
city of Mexico, which in the early part of the sixteenth
century would be the ninth or tenth day of May (old style)
or the nineteenth or twentieth day of May (new style).<note place='foot'>E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>,
ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 117 note 1, 121-125,
153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen
aus dem königlichen Museum
für Völkerkunde</hi>, vol. vi. Heft 2/4).</note>
Whatever the exact date of the celebration may have been,
we are told that the <q>feast was not made to any other end,
but to demand rain, in the same manner that we solemnize
the Rogations; and this feast was always in May, which is
the time that they have most need of rain in those countries.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 380;
Diego Duran, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 101; <hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit
Ramirez, Histoire de l'Origine
des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle
Espagne selon leurs traditions</hi>, publié
par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), p. 160;
J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>,
lib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. p. 257 (Madrid,
1723). I have modernized the spelling
of Acosta's old translator (Edward
Grimston).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The training
and
equipment
of the
human
god. The
manner
of the
sacrifice.</note>
At this festival the great god died in the person of one
human representative and came to life again in the person
of another, who was destined to enjoy the fatal honour of
divinity for a year and to perish, like all his predecessors, at
the end of it. The young man singled out for this high dignity
was carefully chosen from among the captives on the ground
of his personal beauty. He had to be of unblemished body,
slim as a reed and straight as a pillar, neither too tall nor
too short. If through high living he grew too fat, he was
obliged to reduce himself by drinking salt water. And in
order that he might behave in his lofty station with
becoming grace and dignity he was carefully trained to
comport himself like a gentleman of the first quality, to
speak correctly and elegantly, to play the flute, to smoke
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
cigars and to snuff at flowers with a dandified air. He was
honourably lodged in the temple where the nobles waited on
him and paid him homage, bringing him meat and serving
like a prince. The king himself saw to it that he was
apparelled in gorgeous attire, <q>for already he esteemed him
as a god.</q> Eagle down was gummed to his head and white
cock's feathers were stuck in his hair, which drooped to his
girdle. A wreath of flowers like roasted maize crowned
his brows, and a garland of the same flowers passed over
his shoulders and under his arm-pits. Golden ornaments
hung from his nose, golden armlets adorned his arms,
golden bells jingled on his legs at every step he took;
earrings of turquoise dangled from his ears, bracelets
of turquoise bedecked his wrists; necklaces of shells
encircled his neck and depended on his breast; he wore
a mantle of network, and round his middle a rich waist-cloth.
When this bejewelled exquisite lounged through the
streets playing on his flute, puffing at a cigar, and smelling
at a nosegay, the people whom he met threw themselves
on the earth before him and prayed to him with
sighs and tears, taking up the dust in their hands and
putting it in their mouths in token of the deepest humiliation
and subjection. Women came forth with children in
their arms and presented them to him, saluting him as a
god. For <q>he passed for our Lord God; the people
acknowledged him as the Lord.</q> All who thus worshipped
him on his passage he saluted gravely and courteously.
Lest he should flee, he was everywhere attended by a guard of
eight pages in the royal livery, four of them with shaven crowns
like the palace-slaves, and four of them with the flowing
locks of warriors; and if he contrived to escape, the captain
of the guard had to take his place as the representative of
the god and to die in his stead. Twenty days before he
was to die, his costume was changed, and four damsels,
delicately nurtured and bearing the names of four goddesses&mdash;the
Goddess of Flowers, the Goddess of the Young Maize,
the Goddess <q>Our Mother among the Water,</q> and the
Goddess of Salt&mdash;were given him to be his brides, and with
them he consorted. During the last five days divine
honours were showered on the destined victim. The king
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
remained in his palace while the whole court went after the
human god. Solemn banquets and dances followed each
other in regular succession and at appointed places. On
the last day the young man, attended by his wives and
pages, embarked in a canoe covered with a royal canopy
and was ferried across the lake to a spot where a little hill
rose from the edge of the water. It was called the Mountain
of Parting, because here his wives bade him a last
farewell. Then, accompanied only by his pages, he repaired
to a small and lonely temple by the wayside. Like the
Mexican temples in general, it was built in the form of a
pyramid; and as the young man ascended the stairs he
broke at every step one of the flutes on which he had
played in the days of his glory. On reaching the summit
he was seized and held down by the priests on his back
upon a block of stone, while one of them cut open his breast,
thrust his hand into the wound, and wrenching out his
heart held it up in sacrifice to the sun. The body of the
dead god was not, like the bodies of common victims, sent
rolling down the steps of the temple, but was carried down
to the foot, where the head was cut off and spitted on a pike.
Such was the regular end of the man who personated the
greatest god of the Mexican pantheon.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet, et R. Siméon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 96-99, 103;
E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>, ii.
(Berlin, 1899), pp. 116-165, 194-209
(the latter passage contains the Aztec
text of Sahagun's account with a
German translation); J. de Acosta,
<hi rend='italic'>The Natural and Moral History of the
Indies</hi> (Hakluyt Society, London,
1880), pp. 350 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit
Ramirez, Histoire de l'Origine des
Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle
Espagne selon leurs traditions</hi>, publié
par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), pp. 157
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Diego Duran, <hi rend='italic'>Historia
de las Indias de Nueva España</hi> (Mexico,
1867-1880), ii. 98-105; J. de Torquemada,
<hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap.
14, vol. ii. pp. 256 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (Madrid,
1723); F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Mexico</hi>, translated by Charles Cullen,
Second Edition (London, 1807), i.
300; Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et
de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
iii. 510-512; H. H. Bancroft,
<hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>
(London, 1875-1876), iii. 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
According to Torquemada the flesh
of the human victim was eaten by the
elders <q>as a sacred and divine flesh</q>;
but this is not mentioned by the other
authorities of the sixteenth century
cited above. Elsewhere (<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of
the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, ii. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)
I cited this cannibal banquet as an
example of a sacramental communion
with the deity; but the silence of most
early writers on the point makes it
doubtful whether the custom has been
correctly reported by Torquemada and
later writers.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice
of a man
in the
character
of the great
Mexican
god Vitzilopochtli
(Huitzilopochtli)
in the
month of
May.</note>
But he was not the only man who played the part of a
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
god and was sacrificed as such in the month of May. The
great god Vitzilopochtli or Huitzilopochtli was also worshipped
at the same season. An image of him was made
out of dough in human shape, arrayed in all the ornaments
of the deity, and set up in his temple. But the god had
also his living representative in the person of a young man,
who, like the human representative of Tezcatlipoca, personated
the divinity for a whole year and was sacrificed at
the end. In the month of May it was the duty of the
divine man, destined so soon to die, to lead the dances
which formed a conspicuous feature of the festivities.
Courtiers and warriors, old and young, danced in winding
figures, holding each other by the hand; and with them
danced young women, who had taken a vow to dance with
roasted maize. On their heads these damsels wore crowns
of roasted maize; festoons of maize hung from their shoulders
and crossed on their breasts; their faces were painted, and
their arms and legs were covered with red feathers. Dancing
in this attire the damsels were said to hold the god Vitzilopochtli
in their arms; but they conducted themselves with
the utmost gravity and decorum. If any man so far forgot
himself as to toy with one of the maidens, the elder warriors
dealt with him promptly and severely, reproaching him for
the sacrilege of which he had been guilty. Sahagun compares
these May dances to the dances of peasant men and women
in old Castile, and the crowns of maize worn by the girls he
compares to the garlands of flowers worn by rustic Castilian
maidens in the month of May. So they danced till nightfall.
Next morning they danced again, and in the course
of the day the man who represented the god Vitzilopochtli
was put to death. He had the privilege of choosing the
hour when he was to die. When the fatal moment drew
near, they clothed him in a curious dress of paper painted
all over with black circles; on his head they clapped a paper
mitre decked with eagle feathers and nodding plumes, among
which was fastened a blood-stained obsidian knife. Thus
attired, with golden bells jingling at his ankles, he led the
dance at all the balls of the festival, and thus attired he went
to his death. The priests seized him, stretched him out,
gripped him tight, cut out his heart, and held it up to the
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
sun. His head was severed from the trunk and spiked
beside the head of the other human god, who had been
sacrificed not long before.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 99-104; E. Seler,
<hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>, ii. (Berlin,
1899) pp. 159-165, 202-209; F. S.
Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated
by Ch. Cullen, Second Edition (London,
1807), i. 301-303; Brasseur de Bourbourg,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Nations civilisées
du Mexique et de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>,
iii. 512-516; H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The
Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>, ii.
321-324. As to the dances of the
maidens wearing garlands of maize,
see also J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and
Moral History of the Indies</hi> (London,
1880), ii. 380.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice
of a man
in the
character
of the great
Mexican
god Quetzalcoatl
in the
month of
February.</note>
In Cholula, a wealthy trading city of Mexico, the
merchants worshipped a god named Quetzalcoatl. His
image, set upon a richly decorated altar or pedestal in a
spacious temple, had the body of a man but the head of a
bird, with a red beak surmounted by a crest, the face
dyed yellow, with a black band running from the eyes to
below the beak, and the tongue lolling out. On its head
was a paper mitre painted black, white, and red; on its
neck a large golden jewel in the shape of butterfly wings;
about its body a feather mantle, black, red, and white;
golden socks and golden sandals encased its legs and feet.
In the right hand the image wielded a wooden instrument
like a sickle, and in the left a buckler covered with the
black and white plumage of sea-birds.<note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural and
Moral History of the Indies</hi> (Hakluyt
Society, London, 1880), ii. 321;
Diego Duran, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de las Indias
de Nueva España</hi> (Mexico, 1867-1880),
ii. 118-120; <hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire
de l'Origine des Indiens qui
habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs
traditions</hi>, publié par D. Charnay
(Paris, 1903), pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Acosta's
description of the idol is abridged.
As to the Mexican god Quetzalcoatl,
worshipped especially by the people of
Cholula, see J. G. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
der amerikanischen Urreligionen</hi>
(Bâle, 1867), pp. 577 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. H.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi> (London, 1875-1876),
iii. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The festival of this
god was celebrated on the third day of February. Forty
days before the festival <q>the merchants bought a slave well
proportioned, without any fault or blemish, either of sickness
or of hurt, whom they did attire with the ornaments of
the idol, that he might represent it forty days. Before his
clothing they did cleanse him, washing him twice in a lake,
which they called the lake of the gods; and being purified,
they attired him like the idol. During these forty days, he
was much respected for his sake whom he represented. By
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
night they did imprison him (as hath been said) lest he
should fly, and in the morning they took him out of prison,
setting him upon an eminent place, where they served him,
giving him exquisite meats to eat. After he had eaten, they
put a chain of flowers about his neck, and many nosegays
in his hands. He had a well-appointed guard, with much
people to accompany him. When he went through the city,
he went dancing and singing through all the streets, that he
might be known for the resemblance of their god, and when
he began to sing, the women and little children came forth
of their houses to salute him, and to offer unto him as to
their god. Two old men of the ancients of the temple came
unto him nine days before the feast, and humbling themselves
before him, they said with a low and submissive voice,
<q>Sir, you must understand that nine days hence the exercise
of dancing and singing doth end, and thou must then die</q>;
and then he must answer, <q>In a good hour.</q> They call this
ceremony <foreign rend='italic'>Neyòlo Maxilt Ileztli</foreign>, which is to say, the advertisement;
and when they did thus advertise him, they took
very careful heed whether he were sad, or if he danced as
joyfully as he was accustomed, the which if he did not as
cheerfully as they desired, they made a foolish superstition
in this manner. They presently took the sacrifizing razors,
the which they washed and cleansed from the blood of men
which remained of the former sacrifices. Of this washing
they made a drink mingled with another liquor made of
cacao, giving it him to drink; they said that this would
make him forget what had been said unto him, and would
make him in a manner insensible, returning to his former
dancing and mirth. They said, moreover, that he would
offer himself cheerfully to death, being enchanted with this
drink. The cause why they sought to take from him this
heaviness, was, for that they held it for an ill augury, and a
fore-telling of some great harm. The day of the feast
being come, after they had done him much honour, sung,
and given him incense, the sacrificers took him about midnight
and did sacrifice him, as hath been said, offering his
heart unto the Moon, the which they did afterwards cast
against the idol, letting the body fall to the bottom of the
stairs of the temple, where such as had offered him took him
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
up, which were the merchants, whose feast it was. Then
having carried him into the chiefest man's house amongst
them, the body was drest with diverse sauces, to celebrate
(at the break of day) the banquet and dinner of the feast,
having first bid the idol good morrow, with a small dance,
which they made whilst the day did break, and that they
prepared the sacrifice. Then did all the merchants assemble
at this banquet, especially those which made it a trafick to
buy and sell slaves, who were bound every year to offer one,
for the resemblance of their god. This idol was one of the
most honoured in all the land; and therefore the temple
where he was, was of great authority.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural and
Moral History of the Indies</hi> (Hakluyt
Society, London, 1880), ii. 384-386.
I have modernized the old translator's
spelling. The accounts of Duran and
the anonymous author of the Ramirez
manuscript agree verbally with that of
Acosta. It is plain that Acosta and
Duran drew on the same source, which
may be the Ramirez manuscript. However,
Duran is the only one of the three
who gives the date of the festival (the
third of February). See Diego Duran,
<hi rend='italic'>Historia de las Indias de Nueva España</hi>
(Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de
l'Origine des Indiens qui habitent
la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions</hi>,
publié par de Charnay (Paris,
1903), pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare A. de
Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>The General History of the
Vast Continent and Islands of America</hi>,
translated by Captain John Stevens
(London, 1725-1726), iii. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. G. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen
Urreligionen</hi> (Bâle, 1867),
pp. 589 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The
Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>
(London, 1875-1876), iii. 286.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice
of a woman
in the
character
of the
Mexican
Goddess of
Salt in the
month of
June.</note>
The honour of living for a short time in the character
of a god and dying a violent death in the same capacity
was not restricted to men in Mexico; women were allowed,
or rather compelled, to enjoy the glory and to share the
doom as representatives of goddesses. Thus in the seventh
month of their year, which corresponded roughly to June, the
Aztecs celebrated a festival in honour of Huixtocihuatl, the
Goddess of Salt. She was said to be a sister of the Rain
Gods, but having quarrelled with them she was banished and
driven to take up her abode in the salt water. Being of
an ingenious turn of mind, she invented the process of
extracting salt by means of pans; hence she was worshipped
by all salt-makers as their patron goddess. Her garments
were yellow; on her head she wore a mitre surmounted by
bunches of waving green plumes, which shone with greenish
iridescent hues in the sun. Her robe and petticoats were
embroidered with patterns simulating the waves of the sea.
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
Golden ear-rings in the form of flowers dangled at her ears;
golden bells jingled at her ankles. In one hand she carried
a round shield painted with the leaves of a certain plant and
adorned with drooping fringes of parrots' feathers; in the
other hand she carried a stout baton ending in a knob and
bedecked with paper, artificial flowers, and feathers. For
ten days before her festival a woman personated the goddess
and wore her gorgeous costume. It was her duty during
these days to lead the dances which at this season were
danced by the women and girls of the salt-makers. They
danced, young, old, and children, in a ring, all holding a
cord, their heads crowned with garlands of a fragrant flower
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia laciniata</foreign>) and singing airs in a shrill soprano. In
the middle of the ring danced the woman who represented
the goddess, with her golden bells jingling at every step,
brandishing her shield, and marking the time of the dance
and song with her baton. On the last day, the eve of the
festival, she had to dance all night without resting till break
of day, when she was to die. Old women supported her in
the weary task, and they all danced together, arm in arm.
With her, too, danced the slaves who were to die with her in
the morning. When the hour was come, they led her, still
personating the goddess, up the steps of the temple of
Tlaloc, followed by the doomed captives. Arrived at the
summit of the pyramid, the butchery began with the captives,
while the woman stood looking on. Her turn being come,
they threw her on her back on the block, and while five men
held her down and two others compressed her throat with
a billet of wood or the sword of a sword-fish to prevent her
from screaming, the priest cut open her breast with his knife,
and thrusting his hand into the wound tore out her heart
and flung it into a bowl. When all was over, the salt-makers
who had witnessed the sacrifice went home to drink and
make merry.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 64, 115-117; J.
de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>
(Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap. 18, vol.
ii. p. 268. Compare F. S. Clavigero,
<hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated by
C. Cullen (London, 1807), i. 305;
Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
Nations Civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>, iii. 517 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi>, ii. 325-327.</note>
</p>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice of
a woman
in the
character
of the
Mexican
Goddess of
the Young
Maize
about Mid-summer.</note>
Again, in the eighth month of the Mexican year, which
answered to the latter end of June and the early part of
July, the Aztecs sacrificed a woman who personated Xilonen,
the goddess of the young maize-cobs (<foreign rend='italic'>xilotl</foreign>). The festival
at which the sacrifice took place was held on the tenth day
of the month about the time when the maize is nearly ripe,
and when fibres shooting forth from the green ear shew that
the grain is fully formed. For eight days before the festival
men and women, clad in rich garments and decked with
jewels, danced and sang together in the courts of the temples,
which were brilliantly illuminated for the purpose. Rows of
tall braziers sent up a flickering blaze, and torchbearers held
aloft huge torches of pinewood. Some of the dancers
themselves carried heavy torches, which flared and spluttered
as they danced. The dances began at sundown and lasted
till about nine o'clock. None but tried and distinguished
warriors might take part in them. The women wore their
long hair hanging loose on their back and shoulders, in
order that the tassels of the maize might likewise grow long
and loose, for the more tassels the more grain in the ear.
Men and women danced holding each other by the hand or
with their arms round each other's waists, marking time
exactly with their feet to the music of the drums and moving
out and in among the flaming braziers and torches. The
dances were strictly decorous. If any man was detected
making love to one of the women dancers, he was publicly
disgraced, severely punished, and never allowed to dance and
sing in public again. On the eve of the festival the woman
who was to die in the character of the Goddess of the Young
Maize was arrayed in the rich robes and splendid jewels of
the divinity whom she personated. The upper part of her
face was painted red and the lower part yellow, probably to
assimilate her to the ruddy and orange hues of the ripe
maize. Her legs and arms were covered with red feathers.
She wore a paper crown decked with a bunch of feathers;
necklaces of gems and gold encircled her neck; her garments
were embroidered with quaint figures; her shoes were
striped with red. In her left hand she held a round shield,
in her right a crimson baton. Thus arrayed, she was led by
other women to offer incense in four different places. All
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
the rest of the night she and they danced and sang in front
of the temple of the goddess Xilonen, whose living image
she was supposed to be. In the morning the nobles danced
a solemn dance by themselves, leaning, or making believe to
lean, on stalks of maize. The women, pranked with garlands
and festoons of yellow flowers, danced also by themselves
along with the victim. Among the priests the one who was
to act as executioner wore a fine bunch of feathers on his
back. Another shook a rattle before the doomed woman as
she mounted up the steps of the temple of Cinteotl, the
Goddess of the Maize. On reaching the summit she was
seized by a priest, who threw her on his back, while the
sacrificer severed her head from her body, tore out her heart,
and threw it in a saucer. When this sacrifice had been
performed in honour of Xilonen, the Goddess of the Young
Maize, the people were free to eat the green ears of maize
and the bread that was baked of it. No one would have
dared to eat of these things before the sacrifice.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet R. Siméon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 118-126;
J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>
(Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap. 19, vol.
ii. pp. 269-271; E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History
of the New World called America</hi>, i.
(Oxford, 1892) pp. 421-423. Compare
Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et
de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>, iii. 518-520;
H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi>, ii. 326 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> I have
followed Torquemada (vol. ii. p. 269)
and the French translators of Sahagun
(p. 65, note 2) in deriving the name of
Xilonen from <foreign rend='italic'>xilotl</foreign> in the sense of
<q>young cobs of maize.</q> But according
to E. J. Payne, the word <foreign rend='italic'>xilotl</foreign>
means <q>hair,</q> and Xilonen is <q>Hairy
Mother</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Mater comata</foreign>) with reference
to the hair-like fibres or tassels that
shoot from the maize-cobs. See E. J.
Payne, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 417. On either
interpretation the goddess is a personification
of the young maize. The
goddess of the maize in general was
called Cinteotl or Centeotl (Centeutl),
a name which, according to Torquemada,
is derived from <foreign rend='italic'>centli</foreign>, <q>maize-cob</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>, lib. vi.
cap. 25, vol. ii. p. 52). But E. J.
Payne, while he regards Cinteotl as the
maize-goddess, explains her name
differently. He says (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 416
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>): <q>The Totonacs worshipped the
corn-spirit under names which were
translated into Mexican as Tzinteotl
(goddess of beginning or origin) and
Tonacayohua (provider of our food).
They considered her to be the wife of
the sun, their supreme god. Theoretically
subordinated to him, the maize-goddess
was in practice the chief deity
of the Totonacs: it was to her service
that the principal warriors, quitting
their wives and children, dedicated
themselves in their old age.</q> Similarly
Clavigero, who lived many years in
Mexico and learned the Mexican
language, explains Cinteotl (Tzinteotl)
to mean <q>original goddess</q>; he adds
that the Maize Goddess changed her
name <q>according to the different states
of the grain in the progress of its
growth</q> (<hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated
by C. Cullen, i. 253 note p).
Another name applied to the Maize
Goddess Cinteotl was Chicomecohuatl
or <q>Seven Snakes.</q> See J. de
Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>, lib.
x. cap. 13, vol. ii. p. 255; J. G.
Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen
Urreligionen</hi> (Bâle, 1867), pp. 491
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>,
ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 112.
Some have held that Cinteotl was a
Maize God rather than a Maize
Goddess. See H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The
Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>, iii.
349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice of
a woman
in the
character
of the
Mexican
goddess
<q>Our
Mother</q>
on Christmas
Day.</note>
Again, in the seventeenth month of the Mexican year,<note place='foot'>The Mexican year of three hundred
and sixty-five days was divided into
eighteen months of twenty days each,
with five supplementary days over.
See J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia
Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap. 36, vol. ii. p. 300
(Madrid, 1723); B. de Sahagun,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale des Choses de la
Nouvelle Espagne</hi>, traduite par D.
Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880),
p. lxvii.; F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History
of Mexico</hi>, translated by C. Cullen
(London, 1807), i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
which corresponded to the latter part of December and the
early part of January, the Aztecs sacrificed a woman, who
personated the goddess Ilamatecutli or Tonan, which means
<q>Our Mother.</q> Her festival fell on Christmas Day, the
twenty-fifth of December. The image of the goddess wore
a two-faced mask with large mouths and protruding eyes.
The woman who represented her was dressed in white robes
and shod with white sandals. Over her white mantle she
wore a leathern jerkin, the lower edge of which was cut into
a fringe of straps, and to the end of each strap was fastened
a small shell. As she walked, the shells clashed together
and made a noise which was heard afar off. The upper
half of her face was painted yellow and the lower half black;
and she wore a wig. In her hand she carried a round
whitewashed shield decorated in the middle with a circle of
eagle feathers, while white heron plumes, ending in eagle
feathers, drooped from it. Thus arrayed and personating
the goddess, the woman danced alone to music played by old
men, and as she danced she sighed and wept at the thought
of the death that was so near. At noon or a little later the
dance ceased; and when the sun was declining in the west,
they led her up the long ascent to the summit of Huitzilopochtli's
temple. Behind her marched the priests clad in
the trappings of all the gods, with masks on their faces.
One of them wore the costume and the mask of the goddess
Ilamatecutli, whom the victim also represented. On
reaching the lofty platform which crowned the pyramidal
temple, they slew her in the usual fashion, wrenched out her
heart, and cut off her head. The dripping head was given
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
to the priest who wore the costume and mask of the goddess
and waving it up and down he danced round the platform,
followed by all the other priests in the attire and masks of
the gods. When the dance had lasted a certain time, the
leader gave the signal, and they all trooped down the long
flight of stairs to disrobe themselves and deposit the masks
and costumes in the chapels where they were usually kept.
Next day the people indulged in a certain pastime. Men
and boys furnished themselves with little bags or nets stuffed
with paper, flowers of galingale, or green leaves of maize,
which they tied to strings, and used them as instruments to
strike any girl or woman they might meet in the streets.
Sometimes three or four urchins would gather round one
girl, beating her till she cried; but some shrewd wenches
went about that day armed with sticks, with which they
retaliated smartly on their assailants. It was a penal offence
to put stones or anything else that could hurt in the bags.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale des
Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>, traduite
par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris,
1880), pp. 75, 158-160; J. de Torquemada,
<hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap.
29, vol. ii. pp. 284 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Madrid, 1723).
Compare F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Mexico</hi>, translated by C. Cullen
(London, 1807), i. 312; Brasseur de
Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Nations
Civilisées du Mexique et de l' Amérique-Centrale</hi>,
iii. 535 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Bancroft,
<hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>,
ii. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice of
a woman
in the
character
of the
Mexican
goddess
the Mother
of the Gods
at the end
of August
or beginning
of
September.</note>
In the preceding custom, what are we to make of the
sacrifice of a woman, who personated the goddess, by a man
who also wore the costume and mask of the goddess, and
who immediately after the sacrifice danced with the bleeding
head of the victim? Perhaps the intention of the strange
rite was to represent the resurrection of the slain goddess in
the person of the priest who wore her costume and mask
and dangled the severed head of her slaughtered representative.
If that was so, it would explain another and still
ghastlier rite, in which the Mexicans seem to have set forth
the doctrine of the divine resurrection. This was to skin
the slain woman who had personated the goddess and then
to clothe in the bloody skin a man, who pranced about in it,
as if he were the dead woman or rather goddess come to
life again. Thus in the eleventh Mexican month, which
corresponded to the latter part of August and the early part
of September, they celebrated a festival in honour of a
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
goddess called the Mother of the Gods (<foreign rend='italic'>Teteo innan</foreign>) or
Our Ancestress (<foreign rend='italic'>Toci</foreign>), or the Heart of the Earth, and they
sacrificed a woman clad in the costume and ornaments of
the goddess. She was a slave bought for the purpose by
the guilds of physicians, surgeons, blood-letters, midwives
and fortune-tellers, who particularly worshipped this deity.
When the poor wretch came forth decked in all the
trappings of the goddess, the people, we are told, looked on
her as equivalent to the Mother of the Gods herself and
paid her as much honour and reverence as if she had indeed
been that great divinity. For eight days they danced
silently in four rows, if dance it could be called in which the
dancers scarcely stirred their legs and bodies, but contented
themselves with moving their hands, in which they held
branches of blossoms, up and down in time to the tuck of
drum. These dances began in the afternoon and lasted till
the sun went down. No one might speak during their
performance; only some lively youths mimicked by a
booming murmur of the lips the rub-a-dub of the drums.
When the dances were over, the medical women, young and
old, divided themselves into two parties and engaged in a
sham fight before the woman who acted the part of the
Mother of the Gods. This they did to divert her and keep
her from being sad and shedding tears; for if she wept, they
deemed it an omen that many men would die in battle and
many women in childbed. The fight between the women
consisted in throwing balls of moss, leaves, or flowers at each
other; and she who personated the goddess led one of the
parties to the attack. These mock battles lasted four days.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
farewell
to the
market. The skin
of the
sacrificed
woman
flayed and
worn by a
man who
personated
the goddess.</note>
After that they led the woman who was to die to the
market-place, that she might bid it farewell; and by way of
doing so she scattered the flour of maize wherever she went.
The priests then attended her to a building near the temple
in which she was to be sacrificed. The knowledge of her
doom was kept from her as far as possible. The medical
women and the midwives comforted her, saying, <q>Be not
cast down, sweetheart; this night thou shalt sleep with the
king; therefore rejoice.</q> Then they put on her the ornaments
of the goddess, and at midnight led her to the temple
where she was to die. On the passage not a word was
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
spoken, not a cough was heard; crowds were gathered to
see her pass, but all kept a profound silence. Arrived at the
summit of the temple she was hoisted on to the back of one
priest, while another adroitly cut off her head. The body,
still warm, was skinned, and a tall robust young man clothed
himself in the bleeding skin and so became in turn a living
image of the goddess. One of the woman's thighs was
flayed separately, and the skin carried to another temple,
where a young man put it over his face as a mask and so
personated the maize-goddess Cinteotl, daughter of the
Mother of the Gods. Meantime the other, clad in the rest
of the woman's skin, hurried down the steps of the temple.
The nobles and warriors fled before him, carrying blood-stained
besoms of couchgrass, but turned to look back at
him from time to time and smote upon their shields as if to
bid him come on. He followed hard after them and all who
saw that flight and pursuit quaked with fear. On arriving
at the foot of the temple of Huitzilopochtli, the man who
wore the skin of the dead woman and personated the Mother
of the Gods, lifted up his arms and stood like a cross before
the image of the god; this action he repeated four times.
Then he joined the man who personated the maize-goddess
Cinteotl, and together they went slowly to the temple of the
Mother of the Gods, where the woman had been sacrificed.
All this time it was night. Next morning at break of day
the man who personated the Mother of the Gods took up
his post on the highest point of the temple; there they
decked him in all the gorgeous trappings of the goddess and
set a splendid crown on his head. Then the captives were
set in a row before him, and arrayed in all his finery he
slaughtered four of them with his own hand: the rest he
left to be butchered by the priests. A variety of ceremonies
and dances followed. Amongst others, the blood of the
human victims was collected in a bowl and set before the
man who personated the Mother of the Gods. He dipped
his finger into the blood and then sucked his bloody finger;
and when he had sucked it he bowed his head and uttered a
dolorous groan, whereat the Indians believed the earth itself
shook and trembled, as did all who heard it. Finally the
skin of the slain woman and the skin of her thigh were
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
carried away and deposited separately at two towers, one of
which stood on the border of the enemy's country.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 133-139:
J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia
Indiana</hi> (Madrid, 1723), lib. x. cap.
23, vol. ii. pp. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Diego Duran,
<hi rend='italic'>Historia de las Indias de Nueva España</hi>
(Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 185-191.
Compare Brasseur de Bourbourg,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Nations civilisées du
Mexique et de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>,
iii. 523-525; H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The
Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>, iii.
353-359; E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
New World called America</hi>, i. (Oxford,
1892), pp. 470 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A statue of basalt,
about half the size of life, said to have
come from Tezcuco, represents a man
clothed in a human skin which he
wears on his body, his arms, and his
face; his own skin is painted bright
red, the other skin a dirty white. See
H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iv. 522;
Marquis de Nadaillac, <hi rend='italic'>L'Amérique
Préhistorique</hi> (Paris, 1883), p. 295,
fig. 119. In the Art Museum (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kunst-Museum</foreign>)
at Bâle there is a statuette
of the same sort. It is labelled:
<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Xipe. Der in einer Menschenhaut
gekleidete Gott. Gesch. v. H. Luk.
Vischer (1828-1837).</foreign></q> The figure is
about eighteen inches high and appears
to be made of a porous stone. It represents
a man seated on his haunches
with his feet crossed in front of him
and his hands resting on his knees.
His own skin, of which the legs, feet,
hands, wrists, neck and part of the face
are visible, is coloured a terra-cotta
red. The rest of his body is covered
by the representation of the skin of a
human victim, of a greyish colour,
quite distinct from that of the wearer,
and this skin is also worn like a mask
on his face. At his back the jacket of
human skin only partially meets, displaying
the wearer's red skin under it
for some distance; it is as if the skin
of the human victim had been split up
the back and then drawn together and
fastened at the back of the wearer like
an ill-fitting and imperfectly buttoned
coat. The hands of the human victim
are represented dangling at the wrists
of the seated figure. I saw this remarkable
statuette in the Museum at
Bâle on July 25th, 1912, but I was
not able to remove it from the case for
closer examination. As to Xipe, the
Mexican god clad in a human skin,
whom the statuette represents, see
below, pp. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Young
girl chosen
to personate
the
Mexican
Goddess of
the Maize,
Chicomecohuatl.</note>
This remarkable festival in honour of the Mother of the
Gods is said to have been immediately preceded by a similar
festival in honour of the Maize Goddess Chicomecohuatl.<note place='foot'>As to this name for the Maize
Goddess, see above, p. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, note 1.</note>
The image of this goddess was of wood and represented her
as a girl of about twelve years of age wearing feminine
ornaments painted in gay colours. On her head was a
pasteboard mitre; her long hair fell on her shoulders; in her
ears she had golden earrings; round her neck she wore a
necklace of golden maize-cobs strung on a blue ribbon, and
in her hands she held the likeness of maize-cobs made of
feathers and garnished with gold. Her festival, which was
observed throughout the whole country with great devotion
on the fifteenth day of September, was preceded by a strict
fast of seven days, during which old and young, sick and
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
whole, ate nothing but broken victuals and dry bread and
drank nothing but water, and did penance by drawing blood
from their ears. The blood so drawn was kept in vessels,
which were not scoured, so that a dry crust formed over it.
On the day before the fast began the people ate and drank
to their heart's content, and they sanctified a woman to represent
Atlatatonan, the Goddess of Lepers, dressing her up
in an appropriate costume. When the fast was over, the
high priest of the temple of Tlaloc sacrificed the woman in
the usual way by tearing out her heart and holding it up as
an offering to the sun. Her body, with all the robes and
ornaments she had worn, was cast into a well or vault in the
temple, and along with the corpse were thrown in all the
plates and dishes out of which the people had eaten, and all
the mats on which they had sat or slept during the fast, as
if, says the historian, they had been infected with the plague
of leprosy. After that the people were free to eat bread,
salt, and tomatoes; and immediately after the sacrifice of
the woman who personated the Goddess of Leprosy they
sanctified a young slave girl of twelve or thirteen years, the
prettiest they could find, to represent the Maize Goddess
Chicomecohuatl. They invested her with the ornaments of
the goddess, putting the mitre on her head and the maize-cobs
round her neck and in her hands, and fastening a green
feather upright on the crown of her head to imitate an ear
of maize. This they did, we are told, in order to signify
that the maize was almost ripe at the time of the festival,
but because it was still tender they chose a girl of tender
years to play the part of the Maize Goddess. The whole long
day they led the poor child in all her finery, with the green
plume nodding on her head, from house to house dancing
merrily to cheer people after the dulness and privations of
the fast.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adoration
of the girl
who personated
the
Goddess of
the Maize.</note>
In the evening all the people assembled at the temple,
the courts of which they lit up by a multitude of lanterns
and candles. There they passed the night without sleeping,
and at midnight, while the trumpets, flutes, and horns discoursed
solemn music, a portable framework or palanquin
was brought forth, bedecked with festoons of maize-cobs and
peppers and filled with seeds of all sorts. This the bearers
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
set down at the door of the chamber in which the wooden
image of the goddess stood. Now the chamber was adorned
and wreathed, both outside and inside, with wreaths of
maize-cobs, peppers, pumpkins, roses, and seeds of every
kind, a wonder to behold; the whole floor was covered
deep with these verdant offerings of the pious. When the
music ceased, a solemn procession came forth of priests and
dignitaries, with flaring lights and smoking censers, leading
in their midst the girl who played the part of the goddess.
Then they made her mount the framework, where she stood
upright on the maize and peppers and pumpkins with which
it was strewed, her hands resting on two bannisters to keep
her from falling. Then the priests swung the smoking
censers round her; the music struck up again, and while it
played, a great dignitary of the temple suddenly stepped up
to her with a razor in his hand and adroitly shore off the
green feather she wore on her head, together with the hair
in which it was fastened, snipping the lock off by the root.
The feather and the hair he then presented to the wooden
image of the goddess with great solemnity and elaborate
ceremonies, weeping and giving her thanks for the fruits of
the earth and the abundant crops which she had bestowed
on the people that year; and as he wept and prayed, all the
people, standing in the courts of the temple, wept and prayed
with him. When that ceremony was over, the girl descended
from the framework and was escorted to the place where she
was to spend the rest of the night. But all the people kept
watch in the courts of the temple by the light of torches till
break of day.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The girl
who personated
the
Goddess of
the Maize
carried in
procession
and worshipped
with offerings
of
human
blood. The
human
representative
of
the Maize
Goddess
put to
death on
a heap of
corn and
her skin
flayed and
worn by a
priest.</note>
The morning being come, and the courts of the temple
being still crowded by the multitude, who would have
deemed it sacrilege to quit the precincts, the priests again
brought forth the damsel attired in the costume of the
goddess, with the mitre on her head and the cobs of maize
about her neck. Again she mounted the portable framework
or palanquin and stood on it, supporting herself by her
hands on the bannisters. Then the elders of the temple
lifted it on their shoulders, and while some swung burning
censers and others played on instruments or sang, they
carried it in procession through the great courtyard to the
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
hall of the god Huitzilopochtli and then back to the
chamber, where stood the wooden image of the Maize Goddess,
whom the girl personated. There they caused the
damsel to descend from the palanquin and to stand on the
heaps of corn and vegetables that had been spread in profusion
on the floor of the sacred chamber. While she stood
there all the elders and nobles came in a line, one behind the
other, carrying the saucers of dry and clotted blood which
they had drawn from their ears by way of penance during
the seven days' fast. One by one they squatted on their
haunches before her, which was the equivalent of falling on
their knees with us, and scraping the crust of blood from the
saucer cast it down before her as an offering in return for
the benefits which she, as the embodiment of the Maize
Goddess, had conferred upon them. When the men had
thus humbly offered their blood to the human representative
of the goddess, the women, forming a long line, did so likewise,
each of them dropping on her hams before the girl and
scraping her blood from the saucer. The ceremony lasted
a long time, for great and small, young and old, all without
exception had to pass before the incarnate deity and make
their offering. When it was over, the people returned home
with glad hearts to feast on flesh and viands of every sort as
merrily, we are told, as good Christians at Easter partake of
meat and other carnal mercies after the long abstinence of
Lent. And when they had eaten and drunk their fill and
rested after the night watch, they returned quite refreshed to
the temple to see the end of the festival. And the end of
the festival was this. The multitude being assembled, the
priests solemnly incensed the girl who personated the goddess;
then they threw her on her back on the heap of corn
and seeds, cut off her head, caught the gushing blood in a
tub, and sprinkled the blood on the wooden image of the
goddess, the walls of the chamber, and the offerings of corn,
peppers, pumpkins, seeds, and vegetables which cumbered
the floor. After that they flayed the headless trunk, and one
of the priests made shift to squeeze himself into the bloody
skin. Having done so they clad him in all the robes which
the girl had worn; they put the mitre on his head, the
necklace of golden maize-cobs about his neck, the maize-cobs
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
of feathers and gold in his hands; and thus arrayed
they led him forth in public, all of them dancing to the tuck
of drum, while he acted as fugleman, skipping and posturing
at the head of the procession as briskly as he could be expected
to do, incommoded as he was by the tight and
clammy skin of the girl and by her clothes, which must have
been much too small for a grown man.<note place='foot'>Diego Duran, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de las
Indias de Nueva España</hi> (Mexico,
1867-1880), ii. 179-184. This remarkable
festival appears not to be
noticed by the other early Spanish
writers such as Sahagun, Acosta, and
Torquemada, who have given us detailed
descriptions of the Mexican
festivals. It might perhaps have been
conjectured that Duran was here describing
the similar festival of the
Mother of the Gods (see above, pp. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), which fell about the same time of
the year. But the conjecture is excluded
by the simple fact that Duran
describes both festivals, the one immediately
after the other, assigning as
their dates the fifteenth and sixteenth
of September respectively (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii.
180, 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). Almost nothing is
known about Duran except that he
was a Spanish monk, apparently a
native of Mexico, who had weak health
and died in 1588. His work remained
in manuscript till it was edited at
Mexico in 1867-1880 by José F.
Ramirez. The original manuscript is
preserved in the Natìonal Library at
Madrid. The accounts contained in
his history bear internal marks of
authenticity and are in general supported
by the independent testimony of
the other early Spanish authorities.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Identification
of
the human
victim
with the
Goddess
of Maize
whom she
personated.</note>
In the foregoing custom the identification of the young
girl with the Maize Goddess appears to be complete. The
golden maize cobs which she wore round her neck, the artificial
maize cobs which she carried in her hands, the green
feather which was stuck in her hair in imitation (we are told)
of a green ear of maize, all set her forth as a personification
of the corn-spirit; and we are expressly informed that she
was specially chosen as a young girl to represent the young
maize, which at the time of the festival had not yet fully
ripened. Further, her identification with the corn and the
corn-goddess was clearly announced by making her stand on
the heaps of maize and there receive the homage and blood-offerings
of the whole people, who thereby returned her
thanks for the benefits which in her character of a divinity
she was supposed to have conferred upon them. Once
more, the practice of beheading her on a heap of corn and
seeds and sprinkling her blood, not only on the image of
the Maize Goddess, but on the piles of maize, peppers,
pumpkins, seeds, and vegetables, can seemingly have had no
other object but to quicken and strengthen the crops of corn
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
and the fruits of the earth in general by infusing into their
representatives the blood of the Corn Goddess herself. The
analogy of this Mexican sacrifice, the meaning of which
appears to be indisputable, may be allowed to strengthen
the interpretation which I have given of other human
sacrifices offered for the crops.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If the Mexican girl, whose
blood was sprinkled on the maize, indeed personated the
Maize Goddess, it becomes more than ever probable that the
girl whose blood the Pawnees similarly sprinkled on the seed
corn personated in like manner the female Spirit of the
Corn; and so with the other human beings whom other
races have slaughtered for the sake of promoting the growth
of the crops.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The resurrection
of
the Maize
Goddess
set forth
by the
wearing of
the skin of
her human
representative.</note>
Lastly, the concluding act of the sacred drama, in which
the body of the dead Maize Goddess was flayed and her skin
worn, together with all her sacred insignia, by a man who
danced before the people in this grim attire, seems to be
best explained on the hypothesis that it was intended
to ensure that the divine death should be immediately
followed by the divine resurrection. If that was so, we
may infer with some degree of probability that the practice
of killing a human representative of a deity has commonly,
perhaps always, been regarded merely as a means of perpetuating
the divine energies in the fulness of youthful
vigour, untainted by the weakness and frailty of age, from
which they must have suffered if the deity had been allowed
to die a natural death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Xipe,
the Flayed
God,
and the
Mexican
festival of
the Flaying
of Men.</note>
This interpretation of the Mexican custom of flaying
human beings and permitting or requiring other persons
to parade publicly in the skins of the victims may perhaps
be confirmed by a consideration of the festival at which this
strange rite was observed on the largest scale, and which
accordingly went by the name of the Festival of the Flaying
of Men (<foreign rend='italic'>Tlacaxipeualiztli</foreign>). It was celebrated in the second
month of the Aztec year, which corresponded to the last
days of February and the early part of March. The exact
day of the festival was the twentieth of March, according
to one pious chronicler, who notes with unction that the
bloody rite fell only one day later than the feast which
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
Holy Church solemnizes in honour of the glorious St.
Joseph. The god whom the Aztecs worshipped in this
strange fashion was named Xipe, <q>the Flayed One,</q> or
Totec, <q>Our Lord.</q> On this occasion he also bore the
solemn name of Youallauan, <q>He who drinks in the Night.</q>
His image was of stone and represented him in human
form with his mouth open as if in the act of speaking; his
body was painted yellow on the one side and drab on the
other; he wore the skin of a flayed man over his own, with
the hands of the victim dangling at his wrists. On his
head he had a hood of various colours, and about his loins
a green petticoat reaching to his knees with a fringe of
small shells. In his two hands he grasped a rattle like the
head of a poppy with the seeds in it; while on his left arm
he supported a yellow shield with a red rim. At his festival
the Mexicans killed all the prisoners they had taken in war,
men, women, and children. The number of the victims was
very great. A Spanish historian of the sixteenth century
estimated that in Mexico more people used to be sacrificed
on the altar than died a natural death. All who were
sacrificed to Xipe, <q>the Flayed God,</q> were themselves
flayed, and men who had made a special vow to the god put
on the skins of the human victims and went about the city
in that guise for twenty days, being everywhere welcomed
and revered as living images of the deity. Forty days
before the festival, according to the historian Duran, they
chose a man to personate the god, clothed him in all the
insignia of the divinity, and led him about in public, doing
him as much reverence all these days as if he had really
been what he pretended to be. Moreover, every parish of
the capital did the same; each of them had its own temple
and appointed its own human representative of the deity,
who received the homage and worship of the parishioners
for the forty days.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
human
shambles. The holy
beggars
clad in the
skins of
the flayed
human
victims.</note>
On the day of the festival these mortal gods and all the
other prisoners, with the exception of a few who were
reserved for a different death, were killed in the usual way.
The scene of the slaughter was the platform on the summit
of the god Huitzilopochtli's temple. Some of the poor
wretches fainted when they came to the foot of the steps
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
and had to be dragged up the long staircase by the hair of
their heads. Arrived at the summit they were slaughtered
one by one on the sacrificial stone by the high priest, who
cut open their breasts, tore out their hearts, and held them
up to the sun, in order to feed the great luminary with these
bleeding relics. Then the bodies were sent rolling down the
staircase, clattering and turning over and over like gourds
as they bumped from step to step till they reached the
bottom. There they were received by other priests, or rather
human butchers, who with a dexterity acquired by practice
slit the back of each body from the nape of the neck to the
heels and peeled off the whole skin in a single piece as neatly
as if it had been a sheepskin. The skinless body was then
fetched away by its owner, that is, by the man who had
captured the prisoner in war. He took it home with him,
carved it, sent one of the thighs to the king, and other joints
to friends, or invited them to come and feast on the carcase
in his house. The skins of the human victims were also a
perquisite of their captors, and were lent or hired out by
them to men who had made a vow of going about clad in
the hides for twenty days. Such men clothed in the
reeking skins of the butchered prisoners were called
Xixipeme or Tototectin after the god Xipe or Totec, whose
living image they were esteemed and whose costume they
wore. Among the devotees who bound themselves to this
pious exercise were persons who suffered from loathsome
skin diseases, such as smallpox, abscesses, and the itch; and
among them there was a fair sprinkling of debauchees, who
had drunk themselves nearly blind and hoped to recover the
use of their precious eyes by parading for a month in this
curious mantle. Thus arrayed, they went from house to house
throughout the city, entering everywhere and asking alms for
the love of God. On entering a house each of these reverend
palmers was made to sit on a heap of leaves; festoons of maize
and wreaths of flowers were placed round his body; and he
was given wine to drink and cakes to eat. And when a
mother saw one of these filthy but sanctified ruffians passing
along the street, she would run to him with her infant and
put it in his arms that he might bless it, which he did with
unction, receiving an alms from the happy mother in return.
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
The earnings of these begging-friars on their rounds were sometimes
considerable, for the rich people rewarded them handsomely.
Whatever they were, the collectors paid them in to
the owners of the skins, who thus made a profit by hiring out
these valuable articles of property. Every night the wearers
of the skins deposited them in the temple and fetched them
again next morning when they set out on their rounds. At
the end of the twenty days the skins were dry, hard,
shrivelled and shrunken, and they smelt so villainously that
people held their noses when they met the holy beggars
arrayed in their fetid mantles. The time being come to
rid themselves of these encumbrances, the devotees walked
in solemn procession, wearing the rotten skins and stinking
like dead dogs, to the temple called Yopico, where they
stripped themselves of the hides and plunged them into a
tub or vat, after which they washed and scrubbed themselves
thoroughly, while their friends smacked their bare bodies loudly
with wet hands in order to squeeze out the human grease
with which they were saturated. Finally, the skins were
solemnly buried, as holy relics, in a vault of the temple.
The burial service was accompanied by chanting and
attended by the whole people; and when it was over, one of
the high dignitaries preached a sermon to the assembled
congregation, in which he dwelt with pathetic eloquence on
the meanness and misery of human existence and exhorted
his hearers to lead a sober and quiet life, to cultivate the
virtues of reverence, modesty, humility and obedience, to be
kind and charitable to the poor and to strangers; he warned
them against the sins of robbery, fornication, adultery, and
covetousness; and kindling with the glow of his oratory, he
passionately admonished, entreated, and implored all who
heard him to choose the good and shun the evil, drawing
a dreadful picture of the ills that would overtake the wicked
here and hereafter, while he painted in alluring colours the
bliss in store for the righteous and the rewards they might
expect to receive at the hands of the deity in the life to
come.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various
Mexican
gods personated
by the men
clad in the
skins of
the human
victims.</note>
While most of the men who masqueraded in the skins
of the human victims appear to have personated the Flayed
God Xipe, whose name they bore in the form Xixipeme,
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
others assumed the ornaments and bore the names of other
Mexican deities, such as Huitzilopochtli and Quetzalcoatl; the
ceremony of investing them with the skins and the insignia
of divinity was called <foreign rend='italic'>netcotoquiliztli</foreign>, which means <q>to think
themselves gods.</q> Amongst the gods thus personated was
Totec. His human representative wore, over the skin of the
flayed man, all the splendid trappings of the deity. On his
head was placed a curious crown decorated with rich feathers.
A golden crescent dangled from his nose, golden earrings
from his ears, and a necklace of hammered gold encircled
his neck. His feet were shod in red shoes decorated with
quail's feathers; his loins were begirt with a petticoat of
gorgeous plumage; and on his back three small paper flags
fluttered and rustled in the wind. In his left hand he carried
a golden shield and in his right a rattle, which he shook and
rattled as he walked with a majestic dancing step. Seats
were always prepared for this human god; and when he sat
down, they offered him a paste made of uncooked maize-flour.
Also they presented to him little bunches of cobs of
maize chosen from the seed-corn; and he received as offerings
the first fruits and the first flowers of the season.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 58-60, 87-94,
584 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische
Studien</hi>, ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 76-100,
171-188 (the latter passage gives
the Aztec text of Sahagun's account
with a German translation); Diego
Duran, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de las Indias de
Nueva España</hi> (Mexico, 1867-1880),
ii. 147-155; J. de Torquemada,
<hi rend='italic'>Monarquia Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap. 11,
vol. ii. pp. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Madrid, 1723).
Compare F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Mexico</hi>, translated by C. Cullen,
Second Edition (London, 1807), i.
297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique
et de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
iii. 503 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Bancroft,
<hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>
(London, 1875-1876), ii. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
According to Torquemada, the prisoners
were flayed alive, but this statement is
not, so far as I know, supported by the
other early Spanish authorities. It is
Duran who gives the 20th of March as
the date of the festival at which the
captives were killed and skinned; but
this is inconsistent with the evidence
of Sahagun, according to whom the
second Aztec month, in which the
festival fell, ended with the 13th of
March. See B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
Générale des Choses de la Nouvelle
Espagne</hi>, p. 51.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Men
roasted
alive as
images of
the Fire-god.</note>
In the eighteenth and last month of their year, which
fell in January, the Mexicans held a festival in honour of the
god of fire. Every fourth year the festival was celebrated
on a grand scale by the sacrifice of a great many men and
women, husbands and wives, who were dressed in the
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
trappings of the fire-god and regarded as his living images.
Bound hand and foot, they were thrown alive into a great
furnace, and after roasting in it for a little were raked
out of the fire before they were dead in order to allow the
priest to cut the hearts out of their scorched, blistered, and
still writhing bodies in the usual way.<note place='foot'>J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia
Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap. 30, vol. ii. pp.
285 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Mexico, 1723); B. de Sahagun,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale des Choses de la
Nouvelle Espagne</hi>, traduite par D.
Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880),
pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The latter writer does
not describe the mode in which the
victims were sacrificed at this quadriennial
festival; but he describes as in
the text the annual sacrifice of victims
in honour of the fire-god in the tenth
month of the Mexican year (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). Compare F. S.
Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated
by C. Cullen, Second Edition
(London, 1807), i. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, ii. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The intention of the
sacrifice probably was to maintain the Fire-god in full
vigour, lest he should grow decrepit or even die of old age,
and mankind should thus be deprived of his valuable services.
This important object was attained by feeding the
fire with live men and women, who thus as it were poured
a fresh stock of vital energy into the veins of the Fire-god
and perhaps of his wife also. But they had to be raked out
of the flames before they were dead; for clearly it would
never do to let them die in the fire, else the Fire-god whom
they personated would die also. For the same reason their
hearts had to be torn from their bodies while they were still
palpitating; what use could the Fire-god make of human
hearts that were burnt to cinders?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Women
flayed in
honour of
the Fire-god
and
their skins
worn by
men who
personated
gods.</note>
This was the ordinary mode of sacrificing the human
representatives of the Fire-god every fourth year. But in
Quauhtitlan, a city distant four leagues from the city of
Mexico, the custom was different. On the eve of the festival
two women were beheaded on the altar of the temple and
afterwards flayed, faces and all, and their thigh bones
extracted. Next morning two men of high rank clothed
themselves in the skins, including the skins of the women's
faces, which they put over their own; and thus arrayed
and carrying in their hands the thigh bones of the victims
they came down the steps of the temple roaring like wild
beasts. A vast crowd of people had assembled to witness
the spectacle, and when they saw the two men coming
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
down the steps in the dripping skins, brandishing the
bones, and bellowing like beasts, they were filled with
fear and said, <q>There come our gods!</q> Arrived at
the foot of the staircase these human gods engaged in
a dance, which they kept up for the rest of the day, never
divesting themselves of the bloody skins till the festival was
over.<note place='foot'>J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia
Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap. 30, vol. ii. p.
286 (Madrid, 1723). Compare F. S.
Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated
by C. Cullen, Second Edition
(London, 1807), i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Brasseur
de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Nations
civilisées du Mexique et de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>,
iii. 539 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The personation
of a god
by a man
wearing
the skin
of a human
victim is
probably
intended to
represent
and ensure
the resurrection
of
the deity.
The idea
of resurrection
from
the dead
is suggested
by
the observation
of snakes
and other
creatures
that cast
their skins.</note>
The theory that the custom of wearing the skin of a
flayed man or woman and personating a god in that
costume is intended to represent the resurrection of the
deity derives some support from the class of persons who
made a vow to masquerade in the skins. They were, as we
have seen, especially men who suffered from diseases of the
skin and the eyes: they hoped, we are told, by wearing the
skins to be cured of their ailments, and the old Spanish
monk who records the belief adds dryly that some were
cured and some were not.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R.
Simeon, pp. 37, 93; E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische
Studien</hi>, ii. (Berlin. 1889)
pp. 96, 185 (quoting the Aztec text of
Sahagun).</note> We may conjecture that by
donning the skins of men who had acted the part of gods
they expected to slough off their own diseased old skins
and to acquire new and healthy skins, like those of the
deities. This notion may have been suggested to them by
the observation of certain animals, such as serpents and
lizards, which seem to renew their youth by casting their
skins and appear refreshed and renovated in new integuments.
That many savages have noticed such transformations
in the animal world is proved by the tales which some
of them tell to account for the origin of death among mankind.
For example, the Arawaks of British Guiana say
that man was created by a good being whom they call
Kururumany. Once on a time this kindly creator came to
earth to see how his creature man was getting on. But
men were so ungrateful that they tried to kill their Maker.
Hence he took from them the gift of immortality and
bestowed it upon animals that change their skins, such as
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
snakes, lizards, and beetles.<note place='foot'>R. Schomburgk, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Britisch-Guiana</hi>
(Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii. 319.
I have already noticed this and the
following stories of the origin of death
in <hi rend='italic'>The Belief in Immortality</hi>, i. 69
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, the Tamanachiers, an
Indian tribe of the Orinoco, tell how the creator kindly
intended to make men immortal by telling them that they
should change their skins. He meant to say that by so doing
they should renew their youth like serpents and beetles.
But the glad tidings were received with such incredulity by
an old woman that the creator in a huff changed his tune
and said very curtly, <q>Ye shall die.</q><note place='foot'>R. Schomburgk, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 320.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Savage
notion that
men would
have been
immortal,
if only they
could have
cast their
skins like
serpents
and crabs.</note>
In Annam they say that Ngoc hoang sent a messenger
from heaven to inform men that when they reached old age
they should change their skins and live for ever, but that
when serpents grew old, they must die. Unfortunately for
the human race the message was perverted in the transmission,
so that men do not change their skins and are therefore
mortal, whereas serpents do cast their old skins and
accordingly live for ever.<note place='foot'>A. Landes, <q>Contes et Légendes
Annamites,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine française,
Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>, No. 25
(Saigon, 1886), pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According to the natives of Nias
the personage who was charged by the creator with the duty
of putting the last touches to man broke his fast on bananas
instead of on river-crabs, as he should have done; for had
he only eaten river-crabs, men would have changed their
skins like crabs, and like crabs would have never died.
But the serpents, wiser in their generation than men, ate
the crabs, and that is why they too are immortal.<note place='foot'>H. Sundermann, <q>Die Insel
Nias und die Mission daselbst,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine
Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>, xi. (1884)
p. 451; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Insel Nias und die
Mission daselbst</hi> (Barmen, 1905), p.
68; E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nias</hi>
(Milan, 1890), p. 295; A. Fehr, <hi rend='italic'>Der
Niasser im Leben und Sterben</hi> (Barmen,
1901), p. 8.</note> Stories
of the same sort are current among the Melanesians.
Thus the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain
account for the origin of death by a tale very like that told
in Annam. The Good Spirit, they say, loved men and
wished to make them immortal, but he hated serpents and
wished to kill them. So he despatched his brother to mankind
with this cheering message: <q>Go to men and take them
the secret of immortality. Tell them to cast their skin every
year. So will they be protected from death, for their life
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
will be constantly renewed. But tell the serpents that they
must henceforth die.</q> Through the carelessness or treachery
of the messenger this message was reversed; so that now,
as we all know, men die and serpents live for ever by
annually casting their skins.<note place='foot'>P. Kleintitschen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner
der Gazellehalbinsel</hi> (Hiltrup
bei Münster, preface dated Christmas,
1906), p. 334.</note> Again, if we can trust the
traditions of the Banks' Islanders and New Hebrideans,
there was a time when men did really cast their skins and
renew their youth. The melancholy change to mortality
was brought about by an old woman, who most unfortunately
resumed her old cast-off skin to please an infant, which
squalled at seeing her in her new integument.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>
(Oxford, 1891), pp. 260, 265;
W. Gray, <q>Some Notes on the Tannese,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1894) p. 232. The
same story of the origin of death has
been recorded in the Shortlands Islands
and among the Kai of German New
Guinea. See C. Ribbe, <hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre
unter den Kannibalen der Salomo-Inseln</hi>
(Dresden-Blasowitz, 1903), p.
148; Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben
der Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp.
161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It is also told with some
variations by the natives of the Admiralty
Islands. See Josef Meier,
<q>Mythen und Sagen der Admiralitätsinsulaner,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, iii. (1908) p.
193.</note> The Gallas
of East Africa say that God sent a certain bird (<foreign rend='italic'>holawaka</foreign>,
<q>the sheep of God</q>) to tell men that they would not die,
but that when they grew old they would slough their
skins and so renew their youth. But the bird foolishly or
maliciously delivered the message to serpents instead of to
men, and that is why ever since men have been mortal and
serpents immortal. For that evil deed God punished the
bird with a painful malady from which it suffers to this
day, and it sits on the tops of trees and moans and wails
perpetually.<note place='foot'>Miss A. Werner, <q>Two Galla
Legends,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, xiii. (1913) pp. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
Mexicans
apparently
thought
that they
could
renew their
own skins
by putting
on those
of other
people.</note>
Thus it appears that some peoples have not only
observed the curious transformations which certain animals
undergo, but have imagined that by means of such transformations
the animals periodically renew their youth and live
for ever. From such observations and fancies it is an easy
step to the conclusion that man might similarly take a fresh
lease of life and renew the lease indefinitely, if only he could
contrive like the animals to get a new skin. This desirable
object the Mexicans apparently sought to accomplish by
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
flaying men and wearing their bleeding skins like garments
thrown over their own. By so doing persons who suffered
from cutaneous diseases hoped to acquire a new and healthy
skin; and by so doing the priests attempted not merely to
revive the gods whom they had just slain in the persons of
their human representatives, but also to restore to their wasting
and decaying frames all the vigour and energy of youth.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General
conclusion:
the custom
of putting
human
beings to
death in
the character
of
gods has
prevailed
in many
parts of
the world.</note>
The rites described in the preceding pages suffice to
prove that human sacrifices of the sort I suppose to have
prevailed at Aricia<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. 376 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> were, as a matter of fact, systematically
offered on a large scale by a people whose level
of culture was probably not inferior, if indeed it was not
distinctly superior, to that occupied by the Italian races
at the early period to which the origin of the Arician
priesthood must be referred. The positive and indubitable
evidence of the prevalence of such sacrifices in one part of
the world may reasonably be allowed to strengthen the
probability of their prevalence in places for which the
evidence is less full and trustworthy. Taken all together,
the facts which we have passed in review seem to shew that
the custom of killing men whom their worshippers regard
as divine has prevailed in many parts of the world. But
to clinch the argument, it is clearly desirable to prove that
the custom of putting to death a human representative of
a god was known and practised in ancient Italy elsewhere
than in the Arician Grove. This proof I now propose to
adduce.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Saturnalia and Kindred Festivals.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Roman Saturnalia.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Roman Saturnalia.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
periods of
license.
The
Roman
Saturnalia.</note>
In an earlier part of this book we saw that many peoples
have been used to observe an annual period of license,
when the customary restraints of law and morality are
thrown aside, when the whole population give themselves
up to extravagant mirth and jollity, and when the darker
passions find a vent which would never be allowed them
in the more staid and sober course of ordinary life. Such
outbursts of the pent-up forces of human nature, too often
degenerating into wild orgies of lust and crime, occur most
commonly at the end of the year, and are frequently associated,
as I have had occasion to point out, with one or
other of the agricultural seasons, especially with the time of
sowing or of harvest. Now, of all these periods of license
the one which is best known and which in modern languages
has given its name to the rest, is the Saturnalia.
This famous festival fell in December, the last month of the
Roman year, and was popularly supposed to commemorate
the merry reign of Saturn, the god of sowing and of
husbandry, who lived on earth long ago as a righteous
and beneficent king of Italy, drew the rude and scattered
dwellers on the mountains together, taught them to till the
ground, gave them laws, and ruled in peace. His reign was
the fabled Golden Age: the earth brought forth abundantly:
no sound of war or discord troubled the happy world: no
baleful love of lucre worked like poison in the blood of the
industrious and contented peasantry. Slavery and private
property were alike unknown: all men had all things in
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
common. At last the good god, the kindly king, vanished
suddenly; but his memory was cherished to distant ages,
shrines were reared in his honour, and many hills and high
places in Italy bore his name.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> ii. 536-540, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi>
viii. 319-327, with the comments of
Servius; Tibullus, i. 3. 35-48; Ovid,
<hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>,
7; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 7. 21-26;
Justin, xliii. 1. 3-5; Aurelius Victor,
<hi rend='italic'>Origo gentis Romanae</hi>, 3; Dionysius
Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit. Rom.</hi> i. 34.
On Saturn and the Saturnalia see
especially L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
ii. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare J. Marquardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>,
iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1885) pp. 586 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W.
Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Festivals
of the Period of the Republic</hi> (London,
1899), pp. 268-273; G. Wissowa,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der Römer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Munich, 1912), pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Ausführliches
Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>,
iv. 427 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> A good account of
the Saturnalia, based on the texts of the
classical writers, is given by Dezobry
(<hi rend='italic'>Rome au siècle d'Auguste</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> iii. 143
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). The name Saturn seems to be
etymologically akin to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>satus</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>satio</foreign>,
<q>a sowing</q> or <q>planting.</q> Compare
Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua Latina</hi>, v. 64,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ab satu est dictus Saturnus</foreign></q>; Festus,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Opima spolia,</q> p. 186 ed. C.
O. Müller: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipse [Saturnus] agrorum
cultor habetur, nominatus a satu,
tenensque falcem effingitur, quae est
insigne agricolae</foreign>.</q> Compare Tertullian,
<hi rend='italic'>Ad Nationes</hi>, ii. 12; Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus
Nationes</hi>, iv. 9; Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De
civitate Dei</hi>, vii. 2, 3, 13, 15, 18, 19.
The god's name appears in the form
Saeturnus inscribed on an ancient bowl
(H. Dessau, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones Latinae
Selectae</hi>, vol. ii. pars i. p. 2, No.
2966).</note> Yet the bright tradition of
his reign was crossed by a dark shadow: his altars are said
to have been stained with the blood of human victims, for
whom a more merciful age afterwards substituted effigies.<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Ant.
Rom.</hi> i. 38; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 7.
31; Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Divin. Inst.</hi> i. 21;
Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus Nationes</hi>, ii. 68.</note>
Of this gloomy side of the god's religion there is little or no
trace in the descriptions which ancient writers have left us
of the Saturnalia. Feasting and revelry and all the mad
pursuit of pleasure are the features that seem to have
especially marked this carnival of antiquity, as it went on
for seven days in the streets and public squares and houses
of ancient Rome from the seventeenth to the twenty-third of
December.<note place='foot'>For the general dissipation of the
Saturnalia see Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> 18; for
the seven days of the popular festival
see Martial, xiv. 72. 2; Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> i. 10. 2; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The license
granted to
slaves at
the Saturnalia. The mock
King of the
Saturnalia.</note>
But no feature of the festival is more remarkable, nothing
in it seems to have struck the ancients themselves more
than the license granted to slaves at this time. The
distinction between the free and the servile classes was
temporarily abolished. The slave might rail at his master,
intoxicate himself like his betters, sit down at table with them,
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
and not even a word of reproof would be administered to
him for conduct which at any other season might have been
punished with stripes, imprisonment, or death.<note place='foot'>Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> ii. 7. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 7. 26; Justin, xliii. 1.
4; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Sulla</hi>, 18; Lucian,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, 5, 7; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De antro
nympharum</hi>, 23.</note> Nay, more,
masters actually changed places with their slaves and waited
on them at table; and not till the serf had done eating and
drinking was the board cleared and dinner set for his
master.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 7, i. 24.
23; Solinus, i. 35; Joannes Lydus,
<hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iii. 15; Athenaeus, xiv.
44, p. 639 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Dio Cassius, lx. 19.</note> So far was this inversion of ranks carried, that
each household became for a time a mimic republic in which
the high offices of state were discharged by the slaves, who
gave their orders and laid down the law as if they were
indeed invested with all the dignity of the consulship, the
praetorship, and the bench.<note place='foot'>Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> 47. 14. Compare
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 23.</note> Like the pale reflection of
power thus accorded to bondsmen at the Saturnalia was the
mock kingship for which freemen cast lots at the same
season. The person on whom the lot fell enjoyed the title
of king, and issued commands of a playful and ludicrous
nature to his temporary subjects. One of them he might
order to mix the wine, another to drink, another to sing,
another to dance, another to speak in his own dispraise,
another to carry a flute-girl on his back round the house.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi>, xiii. 15; Arrian,
<hi rend='italic'>Epicteti Dissert.</hi> i. 25. 8; Lucian,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Personation
of
Saturn at
the Saturnalia
by a
soldier who
afterwards
suffered
death. The sarcophagus
of
St. Dasius,
the martyr
on whom
the lot fell
to play the
part of
Saturn.</note>
Now, when we remember that the liberty allowed to
slaves at this festive season was supposed to be an imitation
of the state of society in Saturn's time, and that in general
the Saturnalia passed for nothing more or less than a
temporary revival or restoration of the reign of that merry
monarch, we are tempted to surmise that the mock king
who presided over the revels may have originally represented
Saturn himself. The conjecture is strongly confirmed, if not
established, by a very curious and interesting account of the
way in which the Saturnalia was celebrated by the Roman
soldiers stationed on the Danube in the reign of Maximian
and Diocletian. The account is preserved in a narrative of
the martyrdom of St. Dasius, which was unearthed from a
Greek manuscript in the Paris library, and published by
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
Professor Franz Cumont of Ghent. Two briefer descriptions
of the event and of the custom are contained in manuscripts
at Milan and Berlin; one of them had already seen the light
in an obscure volume printed at Urbino in 1727, but its
importance for the history of the Roman religion, both
ancient and modern, appears to have been overlooked until
Professor Cumont drew the attention of scholars to all three
narratives by publishing them together some years ago.<note place='foot'><q>Les Actes de S. Dasius,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Analecta
Bollandiana</hi>, xvi. (1897) pp. 5-16.
I have to thank Prof. Cumont
for courteously sending me a copy of
this important paper. The bearing of
the new evidence on the Saturnalia
has been further discussed by Messrs.
Parmentier and Cumont (<q>Le roi des
Saturnales,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de Philologie</hi>, xxi.
(1897) pp. 143-153).</note>
According to these narratives, which have all the appearance
of being authentic, and of which the longest is probably
based on official documents, the Roman soldiers at Durostorum
in Lower Moesia celebrated the Saturnalia year by
year in the following manner. Thirty days before the
festival they chose by lot from amongst themselves a young
and handsome man, who was then clothed in royal attire to
resemble Saturn. Thus arrayed and attended by a multitude
of soldiers he went about in public with full license to
indulge his passions and to taste of every pleasure, however
base and shameful. But if his reign was merry, it was short
and ended tragically; for when the thirty days were up and
the festival of Saturn had come, he cut his own throat on
the altar of the god whom he personated.<note place='foot'>The phrase of the Paris MS. is
ambiguous (τοῖς ἀνωνύμοις καὶ μυσαροῖς
εἰδώλοις προσεκόμιζεν ἑαυτὸν σπονδήν,
ἀναιρούμενος ὑπὸ μαχαίρας); but the
other two versions say plainly that the
mock king perished by his own hand
(μέλλοντα ἑαυτὸν ἐπισφάξαι τῷ βωμῷ τοῦ
Κρόνου, Berlin MS.; ἑαυτὸν ἐπισφάξαι
αὐτοχείρως τῷ Κρόνῳ, Milan MS.).</note> In the year
303 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> the lot fell upon the Christian soldier Dasius, but he
refused to play the part of the heathen god and soil his last
days by debauchery. The threats and arguments of his
commanding officer Bassus failed to shake his constancy,
and accordingly he was beheaded, as the Christian martyrologist
records with minute accuracy, at Durostorum by
the soldier John on Friday the twentieth day of November,
being the twenty-fourth day of the moon, at the fourth
hour.
</p>

<p>
Since this narrative was published by Professor Cumont,
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
its historical character, which had been doubted or denied,
has received strong confirmation from an interesting discovery.
In the crypt of the cathedral which crowns the
promontory of Ancona there is preserved, among other
remarkable antiquities, a white marble sarcophagus bearing
a Greek inscription, in characters of the age of Justinian, to
the following effect: <q>Here lies the holy martyr Dasius,
brought from Durostorum.</q> The sarcophagus was transferred
to the crypt of the cathedral in 1848 from the church
of San Pellegrino, under the high altar of which, as we learn
from a Latin inscription let into the masonry, the martyr's
bones still repose with those of two other saints. How long
the sarcophagus was deposited in the church of San Pellegrino,
we do not know; but it is recorded to have been there
in the year 1650. We may suppose that the saint's relics
were transferred for safety to Ancona at some time in the
troubled centuries which followed his martyrdom, when
Moesia was occupied and ravaged by successive hordes of
barbarian invaders.<note place='foot'>Franz Cumont, <q>Le tombeau de
S. Dasius de Durostorum,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Analecta Bollandiana</hi>,
xxvii. (Brussels, 1908) pp. 369-372.
The inscription on the sarcophagus
runs thus: Ἐνταῦθα κατακεῖται
ὁ ἅγιος μάρτυς Δάσιος ἐνεχθεὶς ἀπὸ
Δωροστόλου. The inscription on the
altar runs thus: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vetere diruta nobiliorem
FF. Karmelitani excalciati aram
extruxerunt subter qua sanctorum
martyrum Peregrini Flaviani Dasii
corpora et infantium ab Herode necatorum
ossa minus decenter antiquitus
recondita honorificentius et populo
spectanda reponi curaverunt die
virgini et matri Theresiae sacro anno
MDCCCIV.</foreign></q></note> At all events it appears certain from
the independent and mutually confirmatory evidence of the
martyrology and the monuments that Dasius was no
mythical saint, but a real man, who suffered death for his
faith at Durostorum in one of the early centuries of the
Christian era. Finding the narrative of the nameless martyrologist
thus established as to the principal fact recorded,
namely, the martyrdom of St. Dasius, we may reasonably
accept his testimony as to the manner and cause of the
martyrdom, all the more because his narrative is precise,
circumstantial, and entirely free from the miraculous element.
Accordingly I conclude that the account which he gives of
the celebration of the Saturnalia among the Roman soldiers
is trustworthy.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The mock
King of the
Saturnalia
may have
been the
degenerate
successor
of a series of
temporary
kings who
personated
Saturn
at the
Saturnalia
and were
put to
death
in the
character
of the god.</note>
This account sets in a new and lurid light the office of
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
the King of the Saturnalia, the ancient Lord of Misrule,
who presided over the winter revels at Rome in the time of
Horace and of Tacitus. It seems to prove that his business
had not always been that of a mere harlequin or merry-andrew
whose only care was that the revelry should run
high and the fun grow fast and furious, while the fire blazed
and crackled on the hearth, while the streets swarmed with
festive crowds, and through the clear frosty air, far away to
the north, Soracte shewed his coronal of snow. When we
compare this comic monarch of the gay, the civilized
metropolis with his grim counterpart of the rude camp on
the Danube, and when we remember the long array of
similar figures, ludicrous yet tragic, who in other ages and
in other lands, wearing mock crowns and wrapped in sceptred
palls, have played their little pranks for a few brief hours or
days, then passed before their time to a violent death, we
can hardly doubt that in the King of the Saturnalia at
Rome, as he is depicted by classical writers, we see only a
feeble emasculated copy of that original, whose strong
features have been fortunately preserved for us by the
obscure author of the <hi rend='italic'>Martyrdom of St. Dasius</hi>. In other
words, the martyrologist's account of the Saturnalia agrees
so closely with the accounts of similar rites elsewhere, which
could not possibly have been known to him, that the
substantial accuracy of his description may be regarded as
established; and further, since the custom of putting a mock
king to death as a representative of a god cannot have
grown out of a practice of appointing him to preside over a
holiday revel, whereas the reverse may very well have
happened, we are justified in assuming that in an earlier
and more barbarous age it was the universal practice in
ancient Italy, wherever the worship of Saturn prevailed, to
choose a man who played the part and enjoyed all the
traditionary privileges of Saturn for a season, and then died,
whether by his own or another's hand, whether by the knife
or the fire or on the gallows-tree, in the character of the
good god who gave his life for the world. In Rome itself
and other great towns the growth of civilization had probably
mitigated this cruel custom long before the Augustan
age, and transformed it into the innocent shape it wears in
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
the writings of the few classical writers who bestow a
passing notice on the holiday King of the Saturnalia. But
in remoter districts the older and sterner practice may long
have survived; and even if after the unification of Italy the
barbarous usage was suppressed by the Roman government,
the memory of it would be handed down by the peasants
and would tend from time to time, as still happens with the
lowest forms of superstition among ourselves, to lead to a
recrudescence of the practice, especially among the rude
soldiery on the outskirts of the empire over whom the
once iron hand of Rome was beginning to relax its grasp.<note place='foot'>The opinion that at Rome a man
used to be sacrificed at the Saturnalia
cannot be regarded as in itself improbable,
when we remember that
down apparently to the establishment
of Christianity a human victim was
slaughtered every year at Rome in
honour of Latian Jupiter. See Tertullian,
<hi rend='italic'>Apologeticus</hi>, 9, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Gnosticos
Scorpiace</hi>, 7; Minucius Felix,
<hi rend='italic'>Octavius</hi>, 22 and 30; Lactantius,
<hi rend='italic'>Divin. Instit.</hi> i. 21; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De
abstinentia</hi>, ii. 56. We may conjecture
that at first the sacrifice took place on
the top of the Alban Mountain, and
was offered to Saturn, to whom, as we
have seen, high places were sacred.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
modern
Carnival
perhaps the
equivalent
of the
ancient
Saturnalia.</note>
The resemblance between the Saturnalia of ancient
and the Carnival of modern Italy has often been remarked;
but in the light of all the facts that have come
before us, we may well ask whether the resemblance does
not amount to identity. We have seen that in Italy, Spain,
and France, that is, in the countries where the influence of
Rome has been deepest and most lasting, a conspicuous
feature of the Carnival is a burlesque figure personifying the
festive season, which after a short career of glory and dissipation
is publicly shot, burnt, or otherwise destroyed, to
the feigned grief or genuine delight of the populace.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If
the view here suggested of the Carnival is correct, this
grotesque personage is no other than a direct successor of
the old King of the Saturnalia, the master of the revels, the
real man who personated Saturn and, when the revels were
over, suffered a real death in his assumed character. The
King of the Bean on Twelfth Night and the mediaeval
Bishop of Fools, Abbot of Unreason, or Lord of Misrule
are figures of the same sort and may perhaps have had a
similar origin. We will consider them in the following
section.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The King of the Bean and the Destival of Fools.'/>
<head>§ 2. The King of the Bean and the Festival of Fools.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The King
of the
Bean on
Twelfth
Night. Crosses
made by
the King
of the
Bean to
protect
the house
against
demons
and
witchcraft.</note>
The custom of electing by lot a King and often also
a Queen of the Bean on Twelfth Night (Epiphany, the
sixth of January) or on the eve of that festival used to
prevail in France, Belgium, Germany, and England, and
it is still kept up in some parts of France. It may be
traced back to the first half of the sixteenth century at
least, and no doubt dates from a very much more remote
antiquity. At the French court the Kings themselves
did not disdain to countenance the mock royalty, and
Louis XIV. even supported with courtly grace the shadowy
dignity in his own person. Every family as a rule elected
its own King. On the eve of the festival a great cake was
baked with a bean in it; the cake was divided in portions,
one for each member of the family, together with one for
God, one for the Virgin, and sometimes one also for the
poor. The person who obtained the portion containing the
bean was proclaimed King of the Bean. Where a Queen
of the Bean was elected as well as a King, a second bean
was sometimes baked in the cake for the Queen. Thus at
Blankenheim, near Neuerburg, in the Eifel, a black and a
white bean were baked in the cake; he who drew the
piece with the black bean was King, and she who drew the
white bean was Queen. In Franche-Comté, at the beginning
of the nineteenth century, they used to put as many
white haricot beans in a hat as there were persons present,
and two coloured beans were added; the beans were drawn
at haphazard from the hat by a child, and they who got the
coloured beans were King and Queen. In England and
perhaps elsewhere the practice was to put a bean in the
cake for the King and a pea for the Queen. But in some
places only the King was elected by lot, and after his
election he chose his Queen for himself. Sometimes a coin
was substituted for the bean in the cake; but though this
usage was followed in southern Germany as early as the
first half of the sixteenth century, it is probably an innovation
on the older custom of employing a bean as the lot.
In France the distribution of the pieces of the cake among
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
the persons present was made in accordance with the
directions of a child, the youngest boy present, who was
placed under or on the table and addressed by the name of
<q>Phoebe</q> or <q>Tébé</q>; he answered in Latin <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Domine</foreign>.</q> The
master of the house, holding a piece of the cake in his hand,
asked the child to whom he should give it, and the child
named any person he pleased. Sometimes the first slice of
cake was regularly assigned to <q>the good God</q> and set
aside for the poor. In the name <q>Phoebe</q> or <q>Tébé,</q> by
which the child was addressed, learned antiquaries have
detected a reference to the oracle of Apollo; but more
probably the name is a simple corruption of the Latin or
French word for bean (Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>faba</foreign>, French <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>fève</foreign>). Immediately
on his election the King of the Bean was enthroned, saluted
by all, and thrice lifted up, while he made crosses with chalk
on the beams and rafters of the ceiling. Great virtue was
attributed to these white crosses. They were supposed to
protect the house for the whole year against
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 28'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>all injuryes and harmes</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Of cursed devils, sprites, and bugges, of conjurings and charmes.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then feasting and revelry began and were kept up merrily
without respect of persons. Every time the King or Queen
drank, the whole company was expected to cry, <q>The King
drinks!</q> or <q>The Queen drinks!</q> Any person who failed
to join in the cry was punished by having his face blackened
with soot or a burned cork or smeared with the lees of
wine. In some parts of the Ardennes the custom was to
fasten great horns of paper in the hair of the delinquent and
to put a huge pair of spectacles on his nose; and he had to
wear these badges of infamy till the end of the festival.<note place='foot'>Joannes Boemus, <hi rend='italic'>Mores, Leges, et
Ritus Omnium Gentium</hi> (Lyons, 1541),
p. 122; <hi rend='italic'>The Popish Kingdome or
reigne of Antichrist, written in Latin
verse by Thomas Naogeorgus and
Englyshed by Barnabe Googe, 1570</hi>,
edited by R. C. Hope (London, 1880),
pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Pasquier, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches de la
France</hi> (Paris, 1633), pp. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
R. Herrick, <q>Twelfth Night, or King
and Queene,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Works of Robert
Herrick</hi> (Edinburgh, 1823), ii. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of Great
Britain</hi> (London, 1883), i. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular
Customs</hi> (London, 1876), pp. 24-28; R.
Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Book of Days</hi> (London
and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Desgranges, <q>Usages du Canton de
Bonneval,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Société
Royale des Antiquaires de France</hi>, i.
(Paris, 1817) pp. 233-236; L.
Beaulieu, <hi rend='italic'>Archéologie de la Lorraine</hi>
(Paris, 1840-1843), i. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi>
(Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic, 1863),
pp. 20-23; E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les
Fêtes religieuses</hi> (Paris, 1867), pp. 29-50;
J. H. Schmitz, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Sagen,
Lieder, Sprüchwörter und Räthsel des
Eifler Volkes</hi> (Trèves, 1856-1858), i.
6; Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi>
(Paris, 1875), i. 19-29; J. Lecœur,
<hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau,
1883-1887), ii. 125;
L. Bonnemère, <q>Le Jour des Rois
en Normandie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions
populaires</hi>, ii. (1887) pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P.
Sébillot, <q>La Fête des Rois,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue
des Traditions populaires</hi>, iii. (1888)
pp. 7-12; A. Meyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions,
Coutumes, Légendes et Contes des
Ardennes</hi> (Charleville, 1890), pp. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. L. M. Noguès, <hi rend='italic'>Les Mœurs d'autrefois
en Saintonge et en Aunis</hi> (Saintes,
1891), pp. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris,
1889), pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ch. Beauquier,
<hi rend='italic'>Les Mois en Franche-Comté</hi> (Paris,
1900), pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. Chapiseau, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</hi>
(Paris, 1902), i. 312-315; Anatole
France, <q>Le roy boit,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annales Politiques
et Littéraires</hi>, 5 Janvier, 1902,
pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>La Bresse Louhannaise</hi>,
Janvier, 1906, pp. 42-46. The
custom of making white crosses on
the ceiling is reported for Germany
and Switzerland, but apparently
not for France. It is mentioned
in the earliest of the works cited
above, namely that of Joannes Boemus,
whose description applies especially to
Franconia (Franken).</note>
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
The custom of electing a King and Queen of the Bean on
Twelfth Day is still kept up all over the north of France.
A miniature porcelain figure of a child is sometimes substituted
for the bean in the cake. If the lot, whether bean
or doll, falls to a boy he becomes King and chooses his
Queen; if it falls to a girl she becomes Queen and chooses
her King.<note place='foot'>This I learn from my friend M.
Léon Chouville of Rouen and Cambridge.
The custom is also kept
up in Bresse (<hi rend='italic'>La Bresse Louhannaise</hi>,
Janvier, 1906, pp. 44-46).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Serious
significance
of the King
of the Bean
and
Twelfth
Night. Divination
on Twelfth
Night.</note>
So far, apart from the crosses chalked up to ban hobgoblins,
witches, and bugs, the King and Queen of the Bean
might seem to be merely playful personages appointed at a
season of festivity to lead the revels. However, a more
serious significance was sometimes attached to the office
and to the ceremonies of Twelfth Day in general. Thus in
Lorraine the height of the hemp crop in the coming year
was prognosticated from the height of the King and Queen;
if the King was the taller of the two, it was supposed that
the male hemp would be higher than the female, but that
the contrary would happen if the Queen were taller than the
King.<note place='foot'>L. Beaulieu, <hi rend='italic'>Archéologie de la
Lorraine</hi> (Paris, 1840-1843), i. 256
note 1; E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai stir les Fêtes
religieuses</hi> (Paris, 1867), p. 43.</note> Again, in the Vosges Mountains, on the borders of
Franche-Comté, it is customary on Twelfth Day for people
to dance on the roofs in order to make the hemp grow tall.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
Further, in many places the beans used in the cake were
carried to the church to be blessed by the clergy, and people
drew omens from the cake as to the good or ill that would
befall them throughout the year. Moreover, certain forms
of divination were resorted to on Twelfth Night for the
purpose of ascertaining in which month of the year wheat
would be dearest.<note place='foot'>Anatole France, <q>Le roy boit,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Annales Politiques et Littéraires</hi>, 5
Janvier, 1902, p. 5. In some parts of
France divination was practised for this
purpose on Christmas Day. Twelve
grains of wheat, each representing a
month of the year, were placed, one
after the other, on a hot fire-shovel;
if the grain bounced up from the
shovel, wheat would be dear in the
corresponding month, but it would be
cheap if the grain remained still. See
J. B. Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi>
(Paris, 1679), p. 268. See further
P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore de France</hi>,
iii. (Paris, 1906) pp. 510 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bonfires
on the Eve
of Twelfth
Night.
Fire
applied to
the fruit-trees
on
the Eve of
Twelfth
Night in
Normandy
and the
Ardennes.</note>
In Franche-Comté, particularly in the Montagne du
Doubs, it is still the custom on the Eve of Twelfth Night
(the fifth of January) to light bonfires, which appear to
have, in the popular mind, some reference to the crops.
The whole population takes part in the festivity. In
the afternoon the young folk draw a cart about the street
collecting fuel. Some people contribute faggots, others
bundles of straw or of dry hemp stalks. Towards evening
the whole of the fuel thus collected is piled up a little way
from the houses and set on fire. While it blazes, the people
dance round it, crying, <q>Good year, come back! Bread
and wine, come back!</q> In the district of Pontarlier the
young folk carry lighted torches about the fields, shaking
sparks over the sowed lands and shouting, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Couaille, couaille,
blanconnie!</foreign></q>&mdash;words of which the meaning has been forgotten.<note place='foot'>Ch. Beauquier, <hi rend='italic'>Les Mois en
Franche-Comté</hi> (Paris, 1900), p. 12.</note>
A similar custom is commonly observed on the
same day (the Eve of Twelfth Night, the fifth of January)
in the Bocage of Normandy, except that it is the fruit-trees
rather than the sowed fields to which the fire is applied.
When the evening shadows have fallen on the landscape,
the darkness begins to be illuminated here and there by
twinkling points of fire, which multiply as the night grows
late, till they appear as numerous on earth as the stars in
the sky. About every village, in the fields and orchards,
on the crests of the hills, wandering lights may be discerned,
vanishing and suddenly reappearing, gathering together and
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
then dispersing, pursuing each other capriciously, and tracing
broken lines, sparkling arabesques of fire in the gloom of
night The peasants are observing the ceremony of the
<q>Moles and Field-mice</q> (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Taupes et Mulots</foreign>); and that evening
there is not a hamlet, not a farm, hardly a solitary cottage
that does not contribute its flame to the general illumination,
till the whole horizon seems in a blaze, and houses, woods,
and hills stand out in dark relief against the glow of the
sky. The villages vie with each other in the number and
brilliancy of the fires they can exhibit on this occasion.
Woods and hedges are scoured to provide the materials for
the blaze. Torches of straw wound about poles are provided
in abundance; and armed with them men and women,
lads and lasses, boys and girls, pour forth from the houses at
nightfall into the fields and orchards. There they run about
among the trees, waving the lighted torches under the
branches and striking the trunks with them so that the
sparks fly out in showers. And as they do so they sing or
scream at the top of their voices certain traditional curses
against the animals and insects that injure the fruit-trees.
They bid the moles and field-mice to depart from their
orchards, threatening to break their bones and burn their
beards if they tarry. The more they do this, the larger,
they believe, will be the crop of fruit in the following autumn.
When everybody has rushed about his own orchard, meadow
or pasture in this fashion, they all assemble on a height or
crest of a hill, where they picnic, each bringing his share
of provisions, cider, or brandy to the feast. There, too,
they kindle a huge bonfire, and dance round it, capering
and brandishing their torches in wild enthusiasm.<note place='foot'>J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887),
ii. 126-129. Compare Amélie
Bosquet, <hi rend='italic'>La Normandie Romanesque
et Merveilleuse</hi> (Paris and Rouen, 1845),
pp. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Der
Baumkultus</hi> (Berlin, 1875), pp. 536 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Customs
of the same sort used to be observed on the same day (the
Eve of Epiphany, the fifth of January) in the Ardennes.
People ran about with burning torches, commanding the
moles and field-mice to go forth. Then they threw the
torches on the ground, and believed that by this proceeding
they purified the earth and made it fruitful.<note place='foot'>A. Meyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions, Coutumes,
Légendes et Contes des Ardennes</hi>
(Charleville, 1890), pp. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fires
kindled
on Twelfth
Night or
the Eve of
Twelfth
Night in
England
for the
sake of
the crops.</note>
This ceremony appears to be intended to ensure a good
crop of fruit by burning out the animals and insects that
harm the fruit-trees. In some parts of England it used to
be customary to light fires at the same season for the
purpose, apparently, of procuring a plentiful crop of wheat
in the ensuing autumn. Thus, <q>in the parish of Pauntley,
a village on the borders of the county of Gloucester, next
Worcestershire, and in the neighbourhood, a custom prevails,
which is intended to prevent the smut in wheat. On the
Eve of Twelfth-day, all the servants of every farmer assemble
together in one of the fields that has been sown with wheat.
At the end of twelve lands, they make twelve fires in a
row with straw, around one of which, much larger than the
rest, they drink a cheerful glass of cider to their master's
health, and success to the future harvest; then, returning
home, they feast on cakes soaked in cider, which they claim
as a reward for their past labours in sowing the grain.</q><note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi>, New Edition (London,
1883), i. 33. In many parishes of
Gloucestershire it used to be customary
on Twelfth Day to light twelve
small fires and one large one (J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 28).</note>
Similarly in Herefordshire, <q>on the Eve of Twelfth Day, at
the approach of evening, the farmers, their friends, servants,
etc., all assemble, and, near six o'clock, all walk together
to a field where wheat is growing. The highest part of the
ground is always chosen, where twelve small fires, and one
large one are lighted up. The attendants, headed by the
master of the family, pledge the company in old cyder,
which circulates freely on these occasions. A circle is
formed round the large fire, when a general shout and
hallooing takes place, which you hear answered from all
the villages and fields near; as I have myself counted fifty
or sixty fires burning at the same time, which are generally
placed on some eminence. This being finished, the company
all return to the house, where the good housewife and her
maids are preparing a good supper, which on this occasion
is very plentiful. A large cake is always provided, with a
hole in the middle. After supper, the company all attend the
bailiff (or head of the oxen) to the wain-house, where the
following particulars are observed. The master, at the head
of his friends, fills the cup (generally of strong ale), and
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
stands opposite the first or finest of the oxen (twenty-four
of which I have often seen tied up in their stalls
together); he then pledges him in a curious toast; the
company then follow his example with all the other oxen,
addressing each by their name. This being over, the large
cake is produced, and is, with much ceremony, put on the
horn of the first ox, through the hole in the cake; he is
then tickled to make him toss his head: if he throws the
cake behind, it is the mistress's perquisite; if before (in what
is termed the <foreign rend='italic'>boosy</foreign>), the bailiff claims this prize. This
ended, the company all return to the house, the doors of
which are in the meantime locked, and not opened till some
joyous songs are sung. On entering, a scene of mirth and
jollity commences, and reigns thro' the house till a late, or
rather an early, hour, the next morning.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Gentleman's Magazine</hi>, vol.
lxi., February, 1791, p. 116. The
article is signed J. W. and dated
<q>Hereford, Jan. 24.</q> The passage
is quoted, correctly in substance, but
with many verbal changes, by J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</hi>,
i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, and by (Mrs.) E. M. Leather,
<hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore of Herefordshire</hi> (Hereford
and London, 1912), p. 93.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>One of
the fires on
Twelfth
Day said
to be intended
<q>to
burn the
old witch.</q> Parallel
custom
observed
in Macedonia
on
the Eve of
Twelfth
Night.</note>
The custom was known as Wassailing and it was
believed to have a beneficial effect on the crops.<note place='foot'>(Mrs.) Ella Mary Leather, <hi rend='italic'>The
Folk-lore of Herefordshire</hi> (Hereford
and London, 1912), pp. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According
to one Herefordshire informant, <q>on Twelfth Day they
make twelve fires of straw and one large one to burn the
old witch; they sing, drink, and dance round it; without
this festival they think they should have no crop.</q><note place='foot'>(Mrs.) E. M. Leather, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This
explanation of the large fire on Twelfth Day is remarkable
and may supply the key to the whole custom of kindling
fires on the fields or in the orchards on that day. We have
seen that witches and fiends of various sorts are believed to
be let loose during the Twelve Days and that in some places
they are formally driven away on Twelfth Night.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It may
well be that the fires lighted on that day were everywhere
primarily intended to burn the witches and other maleficent
beings swarming invisible in the mischief-laden air, and that
the benefit supposed to be conferred by the fires on the crops
was not so much the positive one of quickening the growth
of vegetation by genial warmth as the negative one of
destroying the baleful influences which would otherwise
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
blast the fruits of the earth and of the trees. This interpretation
of the English and French custom of lighting fires
in fields and orchards on Twelfth Night is confirmed by a
parallel custom observed by Macedonian peasants for the
express purpose of burning up certain malicious fiends, who
are believed to be abroad at this season. These noxious
beings are known as <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Karkantzari</foreign> or <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Skatsantzari</foreign>. They are
thought to be living people, whether men or women, who during
the Twelve Days are transformed into horrible monsters,
with long nails, red faces, bloodshot eyes, snottering noses,
and slobbering mouths. In this hideous guise they roam
about by night haunting houses and making the peasant's
life well-nigh unbearable; they knock at the doors and
should they be refused admittance they will scramble down
the chimney and pinch, worry, and defile the sleepers in
their beds. The only way to escape from these tormenters
is to seize and bind them fast with a straw rope. If you
have no such rope or your heart fails you, there is nothing
for it but to shut yourself up in the house before dark, fasten
the door tight, block up the chimney, and wait for daylight;
for it is only at night that the monsters are on the prowl,
during the day they resume their ordinary human shape.
However, in some places strenuous efforts are made during
the Twelve Days to destroy these hateful nocturnal goblins
by fire. For example, on Christmas Eve some people
burn the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Karkantzari</foreign> by lighting faggots of holm-oak
and throwing them out into the streets at early dawn. In
other places, notably at Melenik, they scald the fiends to
death on New Year's Eve by means of pancakes frizzling
and hissing in a pan. While the goodwife is baking
the cakes, the goodman disguises himself as one of the
fiends in a fur coat turned inside out, and in his assumed
character dances and sings outside the door, while he invites
his wife to join him in the dance. In other districts people
collect faggots during the whole of the Twelve Days and
lay them up on the hearth. Then on the Eve of Twelfth
Night they set fire to the pile in order that the goblins,
who are supposed to be lurking under the ashes,
may utterly perish.<note place='foot'>G. F. Abbott. <hi rend='italic'>Macedonian Folk-lore</hi> (Cambridge, 1903), pp. 73-75.</note> Thus the view that the large fire in
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
Herefordshire on Twelfth Night is intended <q>to burn the
old witch</q> is far more probable than the opinion that it
represents the Virgin Mary, and that the other twelve fires
stand for the twelve apostles.<note place='foot'>This opinion is mentioned by
(Mrs.) E. M. Leather, <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore
of Herefordshire</hi>, p. 95.</note> This latter interpretation is
in all probability nothing more than a Christian gloss put
upon an old heathen custom of which the meaning was
forgotten.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other
accounts
of the fires
on Twelfth
Night in
England
and
Ireland.</note>
The Gloucestershire custom was described by the
English traveller Thomas Pennant in the latter part of the
eighteenth century. He says: <q>A custom savouring of
the Scotch Bel-tien prevales in Gloucestershire, particularly
about Newent and the neighbouring parishes, on the
twelfth day, or on the Epiphany, in the evening. All
the servants of every particular farmer assemble together
in one of the fields that has been sown with wheat; on
the border of which, in the most conspicuous or most
elevated place, they make twelve fires of straw, in a
row; around one of which, made larger than the rest,
they drink a cheerful glass of cyder to their master's
health, success to the future harvest, and then returning
home, they feast on cakes made of carraways, etc., soaked
in cyder, which they claim as a reward for their past
labours in sowing the grain.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Pennant, <q>A Tour in
Scotland, 1769,</q> in John Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi> (London, 1808-1814),
iii. 49.</note> In Shropshire also it used
to be customary to kindle festal fires on the tops of hills and
other high places on Twelfth Night.<note place='foot'>Thomas Hyde, <hi rend='italic'>Historia religionis
veterum Persarum</hi> (Oxford, 1700), p.
257.</note> Again, in Ireland <q>on
Twelfth-Eve in Christmas, they use to set up as high as
they can a sieve of oats, and in it a dozen of candles set
round, and in the centre one larger, all lighted. This in
memory of our Saviour and his Apostles, lights of the
world.</q><note place='foot'>Sir Henry Piers, <hi rend='italic'>Description of
the County of Westmeath</hi>, quoted by
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1883), i. 25.</note> Down to the present time, apparently, in the
county of Roscommon, <q>Twelfth Night, which is Old
Christmas Day, is a greater day than Christmas Day itself.
Thirteen rushlights are made in remembrance of the numbers
at the Last Supper, and each is named after some member
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
of the family. If there are not enough in the household
other relations' names are added. The candles are stuck in
a cake of cow-dung and lighted, and as each burns out, so
will be the length of each person's life. Rushlights are only
used for this occasion.</q><note place='foot'>H. J. Byrne, <q>All Hallows Eve
and other Festivals in Connaught,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xviii. (1907) p. 439.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief
of the
Germanic
peoples
that the
weather
for the
twelve
months of
the year is
determined
by the
weather
of the
Twelve
Days.</note>
In these English and Irish customs observed on
Twelfth Night the twelve fires or candles probably refer
either to the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany or
to the twelve months of the year. In favour of this
view it may be said that according to a popular opinion,
which has been reported in England<note place='foot'>C. S. Burne and G. F. Jackson,
<hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1883),
p. 408.</note> and is widely
diffused in Germany and the German provinces of Austria,
the weather of the twelve days in question determines
the weather of the twelve following months, so that
from the weather on each of these days it is possible
to predict the weather of the corresponding month in the
ensuing year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Popish Kingdome or reigne of
Antichrist, written in Latin verse by
Thomas Naogeorgus and Englyshed by
Barnabe Googe, 1570</hi>, edited by R. C.
Hope (London, 1880), p. 46; E.
Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 473, § 237; A. Birlinger,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</hi> (Freiburg
im Breisgau, 1861-1862), i. 468,
§ 696; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848), p. 411; A.
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen
aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 115,
§ 354; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 61, § 74;
Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 18; M. Toeppen,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Danzig,
1867), p. 61; L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube
und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum
Oldenburg</hi> (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 29,
§ 294; August Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 175; K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen,
Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi>
(Vienna, 1880), p. 250, § 1292; Christian
Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und Sagen aus
Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 231;
J. Haltrich, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger
Sachsen</hi> (Vienna, 1885), p. 282;
Willibald Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde
der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>
(Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 317;
Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 12; P. Drechsler,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in
Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 16
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Hence in Swabia the days are called <q>the
Twelve Lot Days</q>; and many people seek to pry into the
future with scientific precision by means of twelve circles,
each subdivided into four quadrants, which they chalk up
over the parlour door or inscribe on paper. Each circle
represents a month, and each quadrant represents a quarter
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
of a month; and according as the sky is overcast or clear
during each quarter of a day from Christmas to Epiphany,
you shade the corresponding quadrant of a circle or
leave it a blank. By this contrivance, as simple as it
is ingenious, you may forecast the weather for the whole
year with more or less of accuracy.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 473, § 237; A. Birlinger,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</hi> (Freiburg
im Breisgau, 1861-1862), i. 468,
§ 696.</note> At Hosskirch in
Swabia they say that you can predict the weather for the
twelve months from the weather of the twelve hours of
Twelfth Day alone.<note place='foot'>A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 470.</note> A somewhat different system of
meteorology is adopted in various parts of Switzerland,
Germany, and Austria. On Christmas, New Year's Day,
or another of the twelve days you take an onion, slice it in
two, peel off twelve coats, and sprinkle a pinch of salt in
each of them. The twelve coats of the onion stand for the
twelve months of the year, and from the amount of moisture
which has gathered in each of them next morning you may
foretell the amount of rain that will fall in the corresponding
month.<note place='foot'>F. J. Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Chur, 1862), p. 131;
A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, i. 469; Chr. Schneller,
<hi rend='italic'>Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1867), p. 231.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the Celtic
peoples
that the
weather for
the twelve
months of
the year is
determined
by the
weather of
the Twelve
Days.</note>
But the belief that the weather of the twelve months can
be predicted from the weather of the twelve days is not
confined to the Germanic peoples. It occurs also in France
and among the Celts of Brittany and Scotland. Thus in
the Bocage of Normandy <q>the village old wives have a very
simple means of divining the general temperature of the
coming season. According to them, the twelve days between
Christmas and Epiphany, including Epiphany, represent the
twelve months of the year. So the thing to do is to mark
the temperature of each of these days, for the temperature
of the corresponding month will be relatively the same.
Some people say that this experience is rarely at fault, and
more trust is put in it than in the predictions of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Double-Liégois</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Jules Lecoeur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887),
ii. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Cornouaille, Brittany, it is popularly believed
that the weather of the last six days of December and the
first six of January prognosticates the weather of the twelve
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
months; but in other parts of Brittany it is the first twelve
days of January that are supposed to be ominous of the
weather for the year. These days are called <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>gour-deziou</foreign>,
which is commonly interpreted <q>male days,</q> but is said to
mean properly <q>additional or supplementary days.</q><note place='foot'>J. Loth, <q>Les douze jours supplémentaires
(<emph>gourdeziou</emph>) des Bretons et
les douze jours des Germains et des
Indous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxiv. (1903)
pp. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again,
in the Highlands of Scotland the twelve days of Christmas
(<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Da latha dheug na Nollaig</foreign>) <q>were the twelve days commencing
from the Nativity or Big <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Nollaig</foreign>, and were deemed
to represent, in respect of weather, the twelve months of the
year. Some say the days should be calculated from New
Year's Day.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
p. 243.</note> Others again reckon the Twelve Days from
the thirty-first of December. Thus Pennant tells us that
<q>the Highlanders form a sort of almanack or presage of the
weather of the ensuing year in the following manner: they
make observation on twelve days, beginning at the last of
December, and hold as an infallible rule, that whatsoever
weather happens on each of those days, the same will prove
to agree in the correspondent months. Thus, January is to
answer to the weather of December 31st; February to that
of January 1st; and so with the rest. Old people still pay
great attention to this augury.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Pennant, <q>A Tour in
Scotland and Voyage to the Hebrides
in 1772,</q> in John Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi> (London, 1808-1814), iii.
384.</note> It is interesting to
observe that in the Celtic regions of Scotland and France
popular opinion hesitates as to the exact date of the twelve
days, some people dating them from Christmas, others from
the New Year, and others again from the thirty-first of
December. This hesitation has an important bearing on
the question of the origin of the twelve days' period, as I
shall point out immediately.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Twelve
Nights
among
the ancient
Aryans of
India.</note>
Thus in the popular mind the twelve days from Christmas
to Epiphany are conceived as a miniature of the whole year,
the character of each particular day answering to the character
of a particular month. The conception appears to be very
ancient, for it meets us again among the Aryans of the
Vedic age in India. They, too, appear to have invested
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
twelve days in midwinter with a sacred character as a time
when the three Ribhus or genii of the seasons rested from
their labours in the home of the sun-god; and these twelve
rest-days they called <q>an image or copy of the year.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Hymns of the Rigveda</hi>, translated
by R. T. H. Griffith (Benares,
1889-1892), book iv. hymn 33, vol. ii.
pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Zimmer, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches
Leben</hi> (Berlin, 1879), pp. 365-367; A.
Hillebrandt, <hi rend='italic'>Ritual-Litteratur, Vedische
Opfer und Zauber</hi> (Strasburg, 1897),
pp. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> However, the Ribhus are
very obscure figures in Vedic mythology.
Compare H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Religion des Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), pp.
235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. A. Macdonnell, <hi rend='italic'>Vedic
Mythology</hi> (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 131
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Twelve
Nights are
probably
an ancient
intercalary
period
introduced
to equate
twelve
lunar
months to
the solar
year.</note>
This curious coincidence, if such it is, between the winter
festivals of the ancient Aryans of India and their modern
kinsfolk in Europe seems to be best explained on the theory
that the twelve days in question derive their sanctity from the
position which they occupied in the calendar of the primitive
Aryans. The coincidence of the name for month with the
name for moon in the various Aryan languages<note place='foot'>F. Max Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on the
Science of Language</hi>, Sixth Edition
(London, 1871), i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; O. Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</hi>
(Strasburg, 1901), p.
547; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Jena, 1906-1907), ii. 228.</note> points to the
conclusion that the year of our remote ancestors was primarily
based on observation of the moon rather than of the sun;
but as a year of twelve lunar months or three hundred and
fifty-four days (reckoning the months at twenty-nine and
thirty days alternately) falls short of the solar year of three
hundred and sixty-five and a quarter days by roundly twelve
days, the discrepancy could not fail to attract the attention
of an intelligent people, such as the primitive Aryans must
be supposed to have been, who had made some progress in
the arts of life; and the most obvious way of removing the
discrepancy and equating the lunar with the solar year is to
add twelve days at the end of each period of twelve lunar
months so as to bring the total days of the year up to three
hundred and sixty-six. The equation is not indeed perfectly
exact, but it may well have been sufficiently so for the
rudimentary science of the primitive Aryans.<note place='foot'>This explanation of the sacredness
of the twelve days among the Indo-European
peoples of the East and West
is due to A. Weber. See O. Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</hi>
(Strasburg, 1901), pp. 391-394;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung und
Urgeschichte</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Jena, 1906-1907), ii. 2.
pp. 228-234. It is accepted by J.
Loth (in <hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxiv. 1903,
pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), Professor H. Hirt (<hi rend='italic'>Die
Indogermanen</hi>, Strasburg, 1905-1907,
ii. 537, 544), Professor J. H. Moulton
(<hi rend='italic'>Two Lectures on the Science of Language</hi>,
Cambridge, 1903, pp. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), and
J. A. MacCulloch (in Dr. J. Hastings's
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics</hi>,
iii. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), but is rejected on what
seem to me insufficient grounds by
Professor O. Schrader (<hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi>).</note> As many
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
savage races in modern times have observed the discrepancy
between solar and lunar time and have essayed to correct it
by observations of the sun or the constellations, especially
the Pleiades,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> there seems no reason to doubt that the
ancestors of the Indo-European peoples in prehistoric times
were able to make similar observations, and that they
were not, as has been suggested, reduced to the necessity
of borrowing the knowledge of such simple and obvious
facts from the star-gazers of ancient Babylonia. Learned
men who make little use of their eyes except to read
books are too apt to underrate the observational powers
of the savage, who lives under totally different conditions
from us, spending most of his time in the open air and
depending for his very existence on the accuracy with which
he notes the varied and changing aspects of nature.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The superstitions
attaching
to the
Twelve
Nights
are not of
Christian
origin.</note>
It has been proposed to explain the manifold superstitions
which cluster round the Twelve Days, or rather the
Twelve Nights, as they are more popularly called,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</hi>
(Chemnitz, 1759), pp. 860, 861;
<hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des
Königreichs Bayern</hi> (Munich, 1860-1867),
i. 365; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1869), p. 61;
P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
i. 15; A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch
und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 11. The
phrase <q>the Twelve Nights</q> in the
sense of <q>the Twelve Days and
Nights</q> is doubtless derived from the
ancient Aryan custom of counting by
nights instead of by days and of regarding
the period of the earth's revolution
on its axis as beginning with the night
rather than with the day. See Caesar,
<hi rend='italic'>De bello Gallico</hi>, vi. 18; Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 11; O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon
der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</hi>
(Strasburg, 1901), pp. 844
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Loth, <q>L'Année celtique,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxv. (1904) pp. 115
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The Athenians reckoned a day
from sunset to sunset, and the Romans
reckoned it from midnight to midnight
(Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xxiii. 3).</note> by reference
to the place which they occupy in the Christian calendar,
beginning as they do immediately after Christmas and ending
with Epiphany.<note place='foot'>A. Tille, <hi rend='italic'>Die Geschichte der deutschen
Weihnacht</hi> (Leipsic, preface dated
1893), pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; O. Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi> (Strasburg, 1901), p.
392.</note> But, in the first place, it is difficult to see
why the interval between these two particular festivals should
have attracted to itself a greater mass of superstitious belief
and custom than the interval between any other two Christian
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
festivals in the calendar; if it really did so, the ground of
its special attraction is still to seek, and on this essential
point the advocates of the Christian origin of the Twelve
Nights throw no light. In the second place, the superstitious
beliefs and customs themselves appear to have no relation to
Christianity but to be purely pagan in character. Lastly, a
fatal objection to the theory in question is that the place
of the Twelve Days in the calendar is not uniformly fixed
to the interval between Christmas and Epiphany; it varies
considerably in popular opinion in different places, but it is
significant that the variations never exceed certain comparatively
narrow limits. The twelve-days' festival, so to
speak, oscillates to and fro about a fixed point, which is
either the end of the year or the winter solstice. Thus in
Silesia the Twelve Days are usually reckoned to fall before
Christmas instead of after it; though in the Polish districts
and the mountainous region of the country the ordinary
German opinion prevails that the days immediately follow
Christmas.<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
i. 15.</note> In some parts of Bavaria the Twelve Days are
counted from St. Thomas's Day (the twenty-first of December)
to New Year's Day; while in parts of Mecklenburg they
begin with New Year's Day and so coincide with the first
twelve days of January,<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 61, § 74.
As to the varying dates of the Twelve
Nights see further E. Mogk, <q>Mythologie,</q>
in H. Paul's <hi rend='italic'>Grundriss der
germanischen Philologie</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Strasburg,
1900), p. 260.</note> and this last mode of reckoning
finds favour, as we saw, with some Celts of Brittany and
Scotland.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</note> These variations in the dating of the Twelve
Days seem irreconcilable with the theory that they derive
their superstitious character purely from the accident that
they fall between Christmas and Epiphany; accordingly we
may safely dismiss the theory of their Christian origin and
recognize, with many good authorities,<note place='foot'>Thus A. Wuttke observes that by
far the greater part of the superstitions
attaching to the Twelve Nights are of
purely heathen origin (<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 61); and K.
Weinhold similarly remarks that the
superstitions in question cannot have
originated in Christian dogmas, and
that they point to the sacredness of
the winter solstice among the heathen
tribes of Germany (<hi rend='italic'>Weinacht-Spiele
und Lieder aus Süddeutschland und
Schlesien</hi>, Vienna, 1875, p. 4).</note> in the Twelve Days
the relics of a purely pagan festival, which was probably
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
celebrated long before the foundation of Christianity. In
truth the hypothesis of the Christian derivation of the
Twelve Days in all probability exactly inverts the historical
order of the facts. On the whole the evidence goes to shew
that the great Christian festivals were arbitrarily timed by
the church so as to coincide with previously existing pagan
festivals for the sake of weaning the heathen from their old
faith and bringing them over to the new religion. To make
the transition as easy as possible the ecclesiastical authorities,
in abolishing the ancient rites, appointed ceremonies of somewhat
similar character on the same days, or nearly so, thus
filling up the spiritual void by a new creation which the
worshipper might accept as an adequate substitute for what
he had lost. Christmas and Easter, the two pivots on which
the Christian calendar revolves, appear both to have been
instituted with this intention: the one superseded a midwinter
festival of the birth of the sun-god, the other superseded
a vernal festival of the death and resurrection of the
vegetation-god.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and for Easter
in particular see my letter <q>Attis and
Christ,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Athenaeum</hi>, No. 4184,
January 4th, 1908, pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Franz
Cumont, <hi rend='italic'>Les Religions orientales dans
le Paganisme romain</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Paris, 1909),
pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 333 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>An
intercalary
period a
natural
subject of
superstition
to
primitive
peoples.</note>
If the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany were
indeed an ancient intercalary period inserted for the purpose
of equating the lunar to the solar year, we can better understand
the curious superstitions that have clustered round
them and the quaint customs that have been annually observed
during their continuance. To the primitive mind it might
well seem that an intercalary period stands outside of the
regular order of things, forming part neither of the lunar nor
of the solar system; it is an excrescence, inevitable but
unaccountable, which breaks the smooth surface of ordinary
existence, an eddy which interrupts the even flow of months
and years. Hence it may be inferred that the ordinary rules
of conduct do not apply to such extraordinary periods, and
that accordingly men may do in them what they would never
dream of doing at other times. Thus intercalary days tend
to degenerate into seasons of unbridled license; they form
an interregnum during which the customary restraints of law
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
and morality are suspended and the ordinary rulers abdicate
their authority in favour of a temporary regent, a sort of
puppet king, who bears a more or less indefinite, capricious,
and precarious sway over a community given up for a time
to riot, turbulence, and disorder. If that is so&mdash;though it
must be confessed that the view here suggested is to a great
extent conjectural&mdash;we may perhaps detect the last surviving
representatives of such puppet kings in the King of the Bean
and other grotesque figures of the same sort who used to
parade with the mimic pomp of sovereignty on one or
other of the twelve days between Christmas and Epiphany.
For the King of the Bean was by no means the only such
ruler of the festive season, nor was Twelfth Night the only
day on which he and his colleagues played their pranks.
We will conclude this part of our subject with a brief notice
of some of these mummers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Three
Kings of
Twelfth
Night.</note>
In the first place it deserves to be noticed that in many
parts of the continent, such as France, Spain, Belgium,
Germany, and Austria, Twelfth Day is regularly associated
with three mythical kings named Caspar, Melchior, and
Balthasar, and derives its popular appellation from them,
being known in Germany and Austria as the Day of the
Three Kings (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Dreikönigstag</foreign>) and in France as the Festival
of the Kings (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Fête des Rois</foreign>). Further, it has been customary
in many places to represent the three kings by mummers,
who go about arrayed in royal costume from door to door,
singing songs and collecting contributions from the households
which they visit.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1883), i. 21
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les Fêtes
religieuses</hi> (Paris, 1867), pp. 32, 38,
39-42; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Calendrier
Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i.
21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus
Böhmen</hi> (Prague, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 18; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic, 1863), pp.
23-26; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi> (Munich,
1860-1867), ii. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. F. Sauvé,
<hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris,
1889), pp. 15-18; Ch. Beauquier, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Mois en Franche-Comté</hi> (Paris, 1900),
pp. 13-15; <hi rend='italic'>La Bresse Louhannaise</hi>,
Janvier, 1906, p. 42; P. Drechsler,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in
Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 51;
A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
im deutschen Westböhmen</hi> (Prague,
1905), pp. 32-34; E. Hoffmann-Krayer,
<hi rend='italic'>Feste und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</hi>
(Zürich, 1913), pp. 104, 121.</note> The custom may very well be older
than Christianity, though it has received a Christian colouring;
for the mythical kings are commonly identified with
the wise men of the East, who are said to have been attracted
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
to the infant Christ at Bethlehem by the sight of his star in
the sky.<note place='foot'>Matthew ii. 1-12.</note> Yet there is no Biblical authority for regarding
these wise men as kings or for fixing their number at three.
In Franche-Comté the old custom is still observed, or at all
events it was so down to recent years. The Three Kings are
personated by three boys dressed in long white shirts with
coloured sashes round their waists; on their heads they wear
pointed mitres of pasteboard decorated with a gilt star and
floating ribbons. Each carries a long wand topped by a
star, which he keeps constantly turning. The one who
personates Melchior has his face blackened with soot, because
Melchior is supposed to have been a negro king. When
they enter a house, they sing a song, setting forth that they
are three kings who have come from three different countries,
led by a star, to adore the infant Jesus at Bethlehem. After
the song the negro king solicits contributions by shaking his
money-box or holding out a basket, in which the inmates of
the house deposit eggs, nuts, apples and so forth. By way
of thanks for this liberality the three kings chant a stave in
which they call down the blessing of God on the household.<note place='foot'>Ch. Beauquier, <hi rend='italic'>Les Mois en Franche-Comté</hi>
(Paris, 1900), pp. 13-16.</note>
The custom is similar in the Vosges Mountains, where the
Three Kings are held in great veneration and invoked by
hedge doctors to effect various cures. For example, if a
man drops to the ground with the falling sickness, you need
only whisper in his right ear, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Gaspard fert myrrham, thus
Melchior, Balthasar aurum</foreign>,</q> and he will get up at once. But
to make the cure complete you must knock three nails into
the earth on the precise spot where he fell; each nail must
be exactly of the length of the patient's little finger, and as
you knock it in you must take care to utter the sufferer's
name.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), pp. 15-17.
Compare the old Roman cure for
the falling sickness (above, p. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>).</note> In many Czech villages of Bohemia the children
who play the part of the Three Kings assimilate themselves
to the wise men of the East in the gospel by carrying gilt
paper, incense, and myrrh with them on their rounds, which
they distribute as gifts in the houses they visit, receiving in
return money or presents in kind. Moreover they fumigate
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
and sprinkle the houses and describe crosses and letters on
the doors. Amongst the Germans of West Bohemia it is
the schoolmaster who, accompanied by some boys, goes the
round of the village on Twelfth Day. He chalks up the
letters C. M. B. (the initials of Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar),
together with three crosses, on every door, and fumigates the
house with a burning censer in order to guard it from evil
influences and infectious diseases.<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>
(Prague, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Some people used to
wear as an amulet a picture representing the adoration of
the Three Kings with a Latin inscription to the following
effect: <q>Holy three kings, Caspar, Melchior, Balthasar, pray
for us, now and in the hour of our death.</q> The picture was
thought to protect the wearer not only from epilepsy, headache,
and fever, but also from the perils of the roads, from
the bite of mad dogs, from sudden death, from sorcery and
witchcraft.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Calendrier
Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 22.
The mere names of the three kings
worn on the person were believed to be
a cure for epilepsy. See J. B. Thiers,
<hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi> (Paris, 1679),
pp. 350 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Whatever its origin, the festival of the Three
Kings goes back to the middle ages, for it is known to have
been celebrated with great pomp at Milan in 1336. On that
occasion the Three Kings appeared wearing crowns, riding
richly caparisoned horses, and surrounded by pages, bodyguards,
and a great retinue of followers. Before them was
carried a golden star, and they offered gifts of gold, frankincense,
and myrrh to the infant Christ cradled in a manger
beside the high altar of the church of St. Eustorgius.<note place='foot'>R. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Book of Days</hi>
(London and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 62,
referring to Warton's <hi rend='italic'>History of English
Poetry</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Lord
of Misrule
in England. Reign of
the Lord
of Misrule
during the
Twelve
Days. Lord of
Misrule in
the Temple.</note>
In our own country a popular figure during the Christmas
holidays used to be the Lord of Misrule, or, as he was called
in Scotland, the Abbot of Unreason, who led the revels at
that merry season in the halls of colleges, the Inns of Court,
the palace of the king, and the mansions of nobles.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1883), i. 497
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval
Stage</hi> (Oxford, 1903), i. 403 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Writing
at the end of the sixteenth century, the antiquary John Stow
tells us that, <q>in the feast of Christmas, there was in the
King's house, wheresoever he was lodged, a Lord of Misrule,
or Master of Merry Disports; and the like had ye in the
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
house of every nobleman of honour or good worship, were he
spiritual or temporal. Amongst the which the Mayor of
London, and either of the Sheriffs, had their several Lords of
Misrule, ever contending, without quarrel or offence, who
should make the rarest pastimes to delight the beholders.
These Lords beginning their rule on Alhollon eve, continued
the same til the morrow after the Feast of the Purification,
commonly called Candlemas day. In all which space there
were fine and subtle disguisings, masks and mummeries,
with playing at cards for counters, nails, and points, in
every house, more for pastime than for gain.</q><note place='foot'>John Stow, <hi rend='italic'>A Survey of London,
written in the year 1598</hi>, edited by
William J. Thoms (London, 1876),
p. 37.</note> Again,
in the seventeenth century the ardent royalist Sir Thomas
Urquhart wrote that <q>they may be likewise said to use their
king ... as about Christmas we do the King of Misrule;
whom we invest with that title to no other end, but to
countenance the Bacchanalian riots and preposterous disorders
of the family, where he is installed.</q><note place='foot'>Sir Thomas Urquhart, <hi rend='italic'>The Discovery
of a most Exquisite Jewel, more
precious than Diamonds inchased in
Gold</hi> (Edinburgh, 1774), p. 146.</note> From the former
passage it appears that the Lords of Misrule often or even
generally reigned for more than three months in winter,
namely from Allhallow Even (the thirty-first of October, the
Eve of All Saints' Day) till Candlemas (the second of
February). Sometimes, however, their reign seems to have
been restricted to the Twelve Nights. Thus we are told
that George Ferrers of Lincoln's Inn was Lord of Misrule
for twelve days one year when King Edward VI. kept his
Christmas with open house at Greenwich.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 499.</note> At Trinity
College, Cambridge, a Master of Arts used to be appointed
to this honourable office, which he held for the twelve days
from Christmas to Twelfth Day, and he resumed office on
Candlemas Day. His duty was to regulate the games and
diversions of the students, particularly the plays which were
acted in the college hall. Similar masters of the revels were
commonly instituted in the colleges at Oxford; for example,
at Merton College the fellows annually elected about St.
Edmund's Day, in November a Lord of Misrule or, as he
was called in the registers, a King of the Bean (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rex Fabarum</foreign>),
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
who held office till Candlemas and sometimes assumed a
number of ridiculous titles. In the Inner Temple a Lord of
Misrule used to be appointed on St. Stephen's Day (the
twenty-sixth of December); surrounded by his courtiers, who
were dubbed by various derogatory or ribald names, he
presided at the dancing, feasting, and minstrelsy in the hall.
Of the mock monarch who in the Christmas holidays of 1635
held office in the Middle Temple the jurisdiction, privileges,
and parade have been minutely described. He was attended
by his lord keeper, lord treasurer, with eight white staves,
a band of gentleman pensioners with poleaxes, and two
chaplains. He dined under a canopy of state both in the
hall and in his own chambers. He received many petitions,
which he passed on in regal style to his Master of Requests;
and he attended service in the Temple church, where his
chaplains preached before him and did him reverence. His
expenses, defrayed from his own purse, amounted to no
less than two thousand pounds.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1883), i. 497
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As to the Lords of Misrule in colleges
and the Inns of Court see further
E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi>,
i. 407 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> <q>I remember to have
heard a Bencher of the Temple tell a story of a tradition in
their house, where they had formerly a custom of choosing
kings for such a season, and allowing him his expences at
the charge of the society: One of our kings, said my friend,
carried his royal inclination a little too far, and there was a
committee ordered to look into the management of his
treasury. Among other things it appeared, that his Majesty
walking <hi rend='italic'>incog.</hi> in the cloister, had overheard a poor man say
to another, Such a small sum would make me the happiest
man in the world. The king out of his royal compassion
privately inquired into his character, and finding him a
proper object of charity, sent him the money. When the
committee read the report, the house passed his accounts
with a plaudite without further examination, upon the
recital of this article in them, <q>For making a man happy,
£10:0:0.</q></q><note place='foot'>Sir Richard Steele, in <hi rend='italic'>The Spectator</hi>,
Friday, 14th December 1711.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lord of
Misrule
at the
English
Court.</note>
At the English court the annual Lord of Misrule is not
to be confounded with the Master of the Revels, who was a
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
permanent official and probably despised the temporary Lord
as an upstart rival and intruder. Certainly there seems to
have been at times bad blood between them. Some correspondence
which passed between the two merry monarchs
in the reign of Edward VI. has been preserved, and from it
we learn that on one occasion the Lord of Misrule had much
difficulty in extracting from the Master of the Revels the
fool's coat, hobby-horses, and other trumpery paraphernalia
which he required for the proper support of his dignity.
Indeed the costumes furnished by his rival were so shabby
that his lordship returned them with a note, in which he
informed the Master of the Revels that the gentlemen of
rank and position who were to wear these liveries stood too
much on their dignity to be seen prancing about the streets
of London rigged out in such old slops. The Lords of Council
had actually to interpose in the petty squabble between the
two potentates.<note place='foot'>E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi>, i. 405-407.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Festival
of Fools
in France.</note>
In France the counterparts of these English Lords of
Misrule masqueraded in clerical attire as mock Bishops,
Archbishops, Popes, or Abbots. The festival at which they
disported themselves was known as the Festival of Fools
(<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Fête des Fous</foreign>), which fell in different places at different
dates, sometimes on Christmas Day, sometimes on St.
Stephen's Day (the twenty-sixth of December), sometimes
on New Year's Day, and sometimes on Twelfth Day.
According to one account <q>on the first day, which was the
festival of Christmas, the lower orders of clergy and monks
cried in unison <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Noël</foreign> (Christmas) and gave themselves up
to jollity. On the morrow, St. Stephen's Day, the deacons
held a council to elect a Pope or Patriarch of Fools, a Bishop
or Archbishop of Innocents, an Abbot of Ninnies; next day,
the festival of St. John, the subdeacons began the dance in
his honour; afterwards, on the fourth day, the festival of the
Holy Innocents, the choristers and minor clergy claimed the
Pope or Bishop or Abbot elect, who made his triumphal
entry into the church on Circumcision Day (the first of
January) and sat enthroned pontifically till the evening of
Epiphany. It was then the joyous reign of this Pope or
this Bishop or this Abbot of Folly which constituted the
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
Festival of Fools and dominated its whimsical phases, the
grotesque and sometimes impious masquerades, the merry
and often disgusting scenes, the furious orgies, the dances,
the games, the profane songs, the impudent parodies of the
catholic liturgy.</q><note place='foot'>L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions
et Survivances</hi>, iv. (Paris, 1896)
pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, quoting Jacob, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et
Coutumes du Moyen-Age</hi>. Compare E.
Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les Fêtes religieuses</hi>
(Paris, 1867), pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In some
places the festival was held on the
octave of Epiphany. See E. K.
Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi>
(Oxford, 1903), i. 323.</note> At these parodies of the most solemn
rites of the church the priests, wearing grotesque masks and
sometimes dressed as women, danced in the choir and sang
obscene chants: laymen disguised as monks and nuns
mingled with the clergy: the altar was transformed into a
tavern, where the deacons and subdeacons ate sausages and
black-puddings or played at dice and cards under the nose
of the celebrant; and the censers smoked with bits of old
shoes instead of incense, filling the church with a foul stench.
After playing these pranks and running, leaping, and cutting
capers through the whole church, they rode about the town
in mean carts, exchanging scurrilities with the crowds of
laughing and jeering spectators.<note place='foot'>E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 51; Papon,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale de la Provence</hi>, iii.
p. 212, quoted by L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iv. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. K.
Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi> (Oxford,
1903), i. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, quoting a circular
letter which was addressed by the
Faculty of Theology at Paris to the
bishops and chapters of France on
March 12th, 1445. Many details as to
the mode of celebrating the Festival of
Fools in different parts of France are
on record. See A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes,
Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de
France</hi> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp.
293-295; E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 52
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> iv. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Bilfinger, <hi rend='italic'>Untersuchungen
über die Zeitrechnung der
alten Germanen</hi>, ii. <hi rend='italic'>Das germanische
Julfest</hi> (Stuttgart, 1901), pp. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
and especially E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The
Mediaeval Stage</hi>, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Buffooneries
in the
churches
at the
Festival
of Fools.</note>
Amongst the buffooneries of the Festival of Fools one of
the most remarkable was the introduction of an ass into the
church, where various pranks were played with the animal.
At Autun the ass was led with great ceremony to the church
under a cloth of gold, the corners of which were held by
four canons; and on entering the sacred edifice the animal
was wrapt in a rich cope, while a parody of the mass was
performed. A regular Latin liturgy in glorification of the
ass was chanted on these occasions, and the celebrant priest
imitated the braying of an ass. At Beauvais the ceremony
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
was performed every year on the fourteenth of January. A
young girl with a child in her arms rode on the back of the
ass in imitation of the Flight into Egypt. Escorted by the
clergy and the people she was led in triumph from the
cathedral to the parish church of St. Stephen. There she and
her ass were introduced into the chancel and stationed on the
left side of the altar; and a long mass was performed which
consisted of scraps borrowed indiscriminately from the services
of many church festivals throughout the year. In the intervals
the singers quenched their thirst: the congregation imitated
their example; and the ass was fed and watered. The
services over, the animal was brought from the chancel into
the nave, where the whole congregation, clergy and laity
mixed up together, danced round the animal and brayed
like asses. Finally, after vespers and compline, the merry
procession, led by the precentor and preceded by a huge
lantern, defiled through the streets to wind up the day with
indecent farces in a great theatre erected opposite the
church.<note place='foot'>E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les Fêtes
religieuses</hi> (Paris, 1867), pp. 53-56;
L. J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions
et Survivances</hi>, iv. 28-41; E. K.
Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi> (Oxford,
1903), i. 330-334. While the
Festival of Fools appears to have been
most popular in France, it is known to
have been celebrated also in Germany,
Bohemia, and England. See E. K.
Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In his
youth the Bohemian reformer John Huss
took part in these mummeries. The
revellers wore masks. <q>A clerk, grotesquely
vested, was dubbed <q>bishop,</q>
set on an ass with his face to the tail,
and led to mass in the church. He
was regaled on a platter of broth and
a bowl of beer, and Huss recalls the
unseemly revel which took place.
Torches were borne instead of candles,
and the clergy turned their garments inside
out and danced</q> (E. K. Chambers,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival of
the Innocents
and
the Boy
Bishop in
France.</note>
A pale reflection or diminutive copy of the Festival of
Fools was the Festival of the Innocents, which was celebrated
on Childermas or Holy Innocents' Day, the twenty-eighth
of December. The custom was widely observed both in
France and England. In France on Childermas or the eve
of the festival the choristers assembled in the church and
chose one of their number to be a Boy Bishop, who officiated
in that character with mock solemnity. Such burlesques of
ecclesiastical ritual appear to have been common on that day
in monasteries and convents, where the offices performed by
the clergy and laity were inverted for the occasion. At the
Franciscan monastery of Antibes, for example, the lay
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
brothers, who usually worked in the kitchen and the
garden, took the place of the priests on Childermas and
celebrated mass in church, clad in tattered sacerdotal vestments
turned inside out, holding the books upside down,
wearing spectacles made of orange peel, mumbling an unintelligible
jargon, and uttering frightful cries. These
buffooneries were kept up certainly as late as the eighteenth
century,<note place='foot'>E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les Fêtes
religieuses</hi>, p. 58; E. K. Chambers,
<hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval Stage</hi> (Oxford, 1903), i.
317 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 336 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare L. J. B.
Bérenger-Feraud, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions et Survivances</hi>,
iv. 25-28. From the evidence
collected by the latter writer it appears
that in some places the election of the
Boy Bishop took place on other days
than Childermas. At Alençon the
election took place on the sixth of
December; at Vienne, in Dauphiné, on
the fifteenth, and at Soissons on St.
Thomas's Day (the twenty-first of
December).</note> and probably later. In the great convent of the
Congrégation de Notre Dame at Paris down to the latter
part of the nineteenth century the nuns and their girl pupils
regularly exchanged parts on Holy Innocents' Day. The
pupils pretended to be nuns and a select few of them were
attired as such, while the nuns made believe to be pupils,
without however changing their dress.<note place='foot'>This I learn from my wife, who as
a girl was educated in the convent.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Boy
Bishop in
England.</note>
In England the Boy Bishop was widely popular during
the later Middle Ages and only succumbed to the austerity
of the Reformation. He is known, for example, to have
officiated in St. Paul's, London, in the cathedrals of Salisbury,
Exeter, Hereford, Gloucester, Lichfield, Norwich, Lincoln,
and York, in great collegiate churches such as Beverley
minster, St. Peter's, Canterbury, and Ottery St. Mary's, in
college chapels such as Magdalen and All Souls' at Oxford,
in the private chapels of the king, and in many parish
churches throughout the country. The election was usually
made on St. Nicholas's Day (the sixth of December), but
the office and authority lasted till Holy Innocents' Day (the
twenty-eighth of December). Both days were appropriate,
for St. Nicholas was the patron saint of school children, and
Holy Innocents' Day commemorates the slaughter of the
young children by Herod. In cathedrals the Bishop was
chosen from among the choir boys. After his election he
was completely apparelled in the episcopal vestments, with
a mitre and crosier, bore the title and displayed the state of
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
a Bishop, and exacted ceremonial obedience from his fellows,
who were dressed like priests. They took possession of the
church and, with the exception of mass, performed all the
ceremonies and offices. The Boy Bishop preached from
the pulpit. At Salisbury the ceremonies at which he presided
are elaborately regulated by the statutes of Roger de
Mortival, enacted in 1319; and two of the great service-books
of the Sarum use, the Breviary and the Processional,
furnish full details of the ministrations of the Boy Bishop and
his fellows. He is even said to have enjoyed the right of disposing
of such prebends as happened to fall vacant during
the days of his episcopacy. But the pranks of the mock
bishop were not confined to the church. Arrayed in full
canonicals he was led about with songs and dances from
house to house, blessing the grinning people and collecting
money in return for his benedictions. At York in the year
1396 the Boy Bishop is known to have gone on his rounds
to places so far distant as Bridlington, Leeds, Beverley,
Fountains Abbey, and Allerton; and the profits which he
made were considerable. William of Wykeham ordained in
1400 that a Boy Bishop should be chosen at Winchester
College and another at New College, Oxford, and that he
should recite the office at the Feast of the Innocents. His
example was followed some forty years afterwards in the
statutes of the royal foundations of Eton College and of
King's College, Cambridge. From being elected on St.
Nicholas's Day the Boy Bishop was sometimes called a
Nicholas Bishop (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Episcopus Nicholatensis</foreign>).<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1883), i. 421-431;
E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval
Stage</hi> (Oxford, 1903), i. 352 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
(Mrs.) Ella Mary Leather, <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore
of Herefordshire</hi> (Hereford and
London, 1912), pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>County
Folk-lore</hi>, II. <hi rend='italic'>North Riding of Yorkshire,
York and the Ainsty</hi>, edited by
Mrs. Gutch (London, 1901), pp. 352
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Spanish
cathedrals, also, it appears to have been customary on St.
Nicholas's Day to elect a chorister to the office of Bishop.
He exercised a certain jurisdiction till Holy Innocents' Day,
and his prebendaries took secular offices, acting in the capacity
of alguazils, catchpoles, dog-whippers, and sweepers.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 426.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
customs
and superstitions
associated
with the
Twelve
Days or
Nights are
probably
relics of
an old
heathen
festival of
intercalation
at
midwinter.</note>
On the whole it seems difficult to suppose that the a
curious superstitions and quaint ceremonies, the outbursts
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
of profanity and the inversions of ranks, which characterize
the popular celebration of the twelve days from Christmas
to Epiphany, have any connexion with the episodes of
Christian history believed to be commemorated by these
two festivals. More probably they are relics of an old
heathen festival celebrated during the twelve intercalary
days which our forefathers annually inserted in their
calendar at midwinter in order to equalize the short lunar
year of twelve months with the longer solar year of three
hundred and sixty-five or sixty-six days. We need not
assume that the license and buffooneries of the festive season
were borrowed from the Roman Saturnalia; both celebrations
may well have been parallel and independent deductions from
a like primitive philosophy of nature. There is not indeed,
so far as I am aware, any direct evidence that the Saturnalia
at Rome was an intercalary festival; but the license which
characterized it, and the temporary reign of a mock king,
who personated Saturn, suggest that it may have been so.
If we were better acquainted with the intercalary periods
of peoples at a comparatively low level of culture, we might
find that they are commonly marked by similar outbreaks
of lawlessness and similar reigns of more or less nominal
and farcical rulers. But unfortunately we know too little
about the observance of such periods among primitive
peoples to be warranted in making any positive affirmation
on the subject.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Superstitions
associated
with
intercalary
periods
among the
Aztecs of
Mexico
and the
Mayas of
Yucatan.</note>
However, there are grounds for thinking that intercalary
periods have commonly been esteemed unlucky. The Aztecs
certainly regarded as very unlucky the five supplementary
days which they added at the end of every year in order to
make up a total of three hundred and sixty-five days.<note place='foot'>As to the Aztec year see above, p. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> note 1.</note> These
five supplementary days, corresponding to the last four of
January and the first of February, were called <foreign rend='italic'>nemontemi</foreign>,
which means <q>vacant,</q> <q>superfluous,</q> or <q>useless.</q> Being
dedicated to no god, they were deemed inauspicious, equally
unfit for the services of religion and the transaction of civil
business. During their continuance no sacrifices were
offered by the priests and no worshippers frequented the
temples. No cases were tried in the courts of justice. The
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
houses were not swept. People abstained from all actions of
importance and confined themselves to performing such as
could not be avoided, or spent the time in paying visits to each
other. In particular they were careful during these fatal days
not to fall asleep in the daytime, not to quarrel, and not to
stumble; because they thought that if they did such things
at that time they would continue to do so for ever. Persons
born on any of these days were deemed unfortunate, destined
to fail in their undertakings and to live in wretchedness and
poverty all their time on earth.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 77, 283; E. Seler,
<q>The Mexican Chronology,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin No.
28</hi> (Washington, 1904), p. 16 (where
some extracts from the Aztec text of
Sahagun are quoted and translated);
J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral History
of the Indies</hi> (Hakluyt Society,
London, 1880), ii. 392.</note> The Mayas of Yucatan
employed a calendar like that of the Aztecs, and they too
looked upon the five supplementary days at the end of the
year as unlucky and of evil omen; hence they gave no
names to these days, and while they lasted the people stayed
for the most part at home; they neither washed themselves,
nor combed their hair, nor loused each other; and they did
no servile or fatiguing work lest some evil should befall them.<note place='foot'>Diego de Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des
Choses de Yucatan</hi> (Paris, 1864), pp.
204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 276 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The five
supplementary
days of the
year in
ancient
Egypt.</note>
The ancient Egyptians like the Aztecs considered a year
to consist of three hundred and sixty ordinary days divided
into months and eked out with five supplementary days so
as to bring the total number of days in the year up to three
hundred and sixty-five; but whereas the Aztecs divided the
three hundred and sixty ordinary days into eighteen arbitrary
divisions or months of twenty days each, the Egyptians, keeping
much closer to the natural periods marked by the phases
of the moon, divided these days into twelve months of thirty
days each.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
viii. 18, p. 106, ed. C. Manitius
(Leipsic, 1898).</note> This mode of regulating the calendar appears to
be exceedingly ancient in Egypt and may even date from
the prehistoric period; for the five days over and above the
year (<foreign rend='italic'>haru duaït hiru ronpit</foreign>) are expressly mentioned in the
texts of the pyramids.<note place='foot'>G. Foucart, in Dr. J. Hastings's
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics</hi>,
iii. (1910) p. 93. Professor Ed. Meyer
adduces astronomical and other grounds
for thinking that the ancient Egyptian
calendar, as we know it, began on the
19th of July, 4241 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, which accordingly
he calls <q>the oldest sure date in
the history of the world.</q> See Ed.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, i. 2.
(Stuttgart and Berlin, 1909), pp. 101
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 197; and against this view C. F.
Lehmann-Haupt, in the <hi rend='italic'>English Historical
Review</hi>, April 1913, p. 348.</note> The myth told to explain their
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
origin was as follows. Once on a time the earth-god Keb
lay secretly with the sky-goddess Nut, and the sun-god Ra
in his anger cursed the goddess, saying that she should give
birth to her offspring neither in any month nor in any year.
He thought, no doubt, by this imprecation to prevent her
from bringing forth the fruit of her womb. But he was outwitted
by the wily Thoth, who engaged the goddess of the
moon in a game of draughts and having won the game took
as a forfeit from her the seventieth part of every day in the
year, and out of the fractions thus abstracted he made up
five new days, which he added to the old year of three
hundred and sixty days. As these days formed no part
either of a month or of a year, the goddess Nut might be
delivered in them without rendering the sun-god's curse void
and of no effect. Accordingly she bore Osiris on the first
of the days, Horus on the second, Set or Typhon on the
third, Isis on the fourth, and Nephthys on the fifth. Of these
five supplementary or intercalary days the third, as the birthday
of the evil deity Set or Typhon, was deemed unlucky,
and the Egyptian kings neither transacted business on it nor
attended to their persons till nightfall.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 12.
Compare Diodorus Siculus, i. 13. 4
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to Keb and Nut, the
parents of Osiris, Isis, and the rest, see
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>
(Berlin, 1905), p. 29. The Egyptian
deities Keb, Nut, and Thoth are called
by Plutarch by the Greek names of
Cronus, Rhea, and Hermes. On
account of these Greek names the
myth was long thought to be of
comparatively recent date; <q>but the
Leyden Papyrus (i. 346) has shown
that the legend existed in its essential
features in the time of the Thebans,
and the Texts of the Pyramids have
carried it back to the very beginnings
of Egyptian mythology</q> (G. Foucart,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>). As five days are the seventy-second,
not the seventieth, part of
three hundred and sixty days, it was
proposed by Wyttenbach to read τὸ
ἑβδομηκοστὸν δεύτερον instead of τὸ
ἑβδομηκοστὸν in Plutarch's text. See
D. Wyttenbachius, <hi rend='italic'>Animadversiones
in Plutarchi Moralia</hi> (Leipsic, 1820-1834),
iii. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus it appears
that the ancient Egyptians regarded the five supplementary or
intercalary days as belonging neither to a month nor to a year,
but as standing outside of both and forming an extraordinary
period quite apart and distinct from the ordinary course of
time. It is probable, though we cannot prove it, that in all
countries intercalary days or months have been so considered
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
by the primitive astronomers who first observed the discrepancy
between solar and lunar time and attempted to
reconcile it by the expedient of intercalation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Early
attempts
of the
Aryan
peoples to
correct the
lunar year
by intercalating
a
month at
intervals
of several
years instead
of
intercalating
twelve
days in
every year.</note>
Thus we infer with some probability that the sacred
Twelve Days or Nights at midwinter derive their peculiar
character in popular custom and superstition from the circumstance
that they were originally an intercalary period
inserted annually at the end of a lunar year of three hundred
and fifty-four days for the purpose of equating it to a solar
year reckoned at three hundred and sixty-six days. However,
there are grounds for thinking that at a very early time the
Aryan peoples sought to correct their lunar year, not by
inserting twelve supplementary days every year, but by
allowing the annual deficiency to accumulate for several years
and then supplying it by a whole intercalary month. In
India the Aryans of the Vedic age appear to have adopted
a year of three hundred and sixty days, divided into twelve
months of thirty days each, and to have remedied the annual
deficiency of five days by intercalating a whole month of
thirty days every fifth year, thus regulating their calendar
according to a five years' cycle.<note place='foot'>H. Zimmer, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches Leben</hi>
(Berlin, 1879), pp. 365-370. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>The Hymns of the Rigveda</hi>, translated
by R. T. H. Griffith (Benares,
1889-1892), Book i. Hymn 164,
stanza 48 (vol. i. p. 293), Book iii.
Hymn 55, stanza 18 (vol. ii. pp.
76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> The Celts of Gaul, as we
learn from the Coligny calendar, also adopted a five years'
cycle, but they managed it differently. They retained the
old lunar year of three hundred and fifty-four days divided
into twelve months, six of thirty days and six of twenty-nine
days; but instead of intercalating twelve days every year to
restore the balance between lunar and solar time they intercalated
a month of thirty days every two and a half years,
so that in each cycle of five years the total number of
intercalary days was sixty, which was equivalent to intercalating
twelve days annually. Thus the result at the end of
each cycle of five years was precisely the same as it would
have been if they had followed the old system of annual
intercalation.<note place='foot'><p>J. A. MacCulloch, in Dr. J.
Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics</hi>, iii. (Edinburgh, 1910) pp. 78
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare S. de Ricci, <q>Le
calendrier Gaulois de Coligny,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue
Celtique</hi>, xix. (1898) pp. 213-223; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Le calendrier Celtique de Coligny,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxi. (1900) pp. 10-27; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Un passage remarquable du calendrier
de Coligny,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxiv.
(1903) pp. 313-316; J. Loth, <q>L'année
Celtique,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxv. (1904)
pp. 113-162; Sir John Rhys, <q>The
Coligny Calendar</q>, <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the
British Academy, 1909-1910</hi>, pp. 207
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As the calendar stands, the number
of days in the ordinary year is 355,
not 354, seven of the months having
thirty days and five of them twenty-nine
days. But the month Equos has
attached to it the sign ANM, which is
attached to all the months of twenty-nine
days but to none of the months of
thirty days except Equos, all of which,
except Equos, are marked with the sign
MAT. Hence, following a suggestion
of M. S. de Ricci (<hi rend='italic'>Revue Celtique</hi>, xxi.
25), I suppose that the month Equos had
regularly twenty-nine days instead of
thirty, and that the attribution of thirty
days to it is an error of the scribe or
mason who engraved the calendar.
</p>
<p>
In the Coligny calendar the summer
solstice seems to be marked by the word
<foreign rend='italic'>trinouxtion</foreign> affixed to the seventeenth
day of the first month (Samonios,
nearly equivalent to our June). As
interpreted by Sir John Rhys (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 217), the word means <q>a period of
three nights of equal length.</q> If he
is right, it follows that the Celts who
constructed the calendar had observed
the summer solstice.</p></note> Why they abandoned the simple and obvious
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
expedient of annually intercalating twelve days, and adopted
instead the more recondite system of intercalating a month of
thirty days every two and a half years, is not plain. It may
be that religious or political motives unknown to us concurred
with practical considerations to recommend the change. One
result of the reform would be the abolition of the temporary
king who, if I am right, used to bear a somewhat tumultuary
sway over the community during the saturnalia of the Twelve
Days. Perhaps the annually recurring disorders which
attended that period of license were not the least urgent of
the reasons which moved the rulers to strike the twelve
intercalary days out of the year and to replace them by an
intercalary month at longer intervals.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Equivalence
of
the new
intercalary
month to
the old
intercalary
Twelve
Days
multiplied
by two and
a half. The
intercalary
month may
have been
a period
of license,
during
which the
reins of
government
were
held by a
temporary
king.</note>
However that may be, the equivalence of the new intercalary
month to the old intercalary Twelve Days multiplied
by two and a half is strongly suggested by a remarkable
feature of the Coligny calendar; for in it the thirty days of
the intercalary month, which bore the name of Ciallos, are
named after the ordinary twelve months of the year. Thus
the first day of the intercalary month is called Samon, which
is the name of the first month of the year; the second day
of the month is called Dumannos, which is the name of the
second month of the year; the third day of the month is
called Rivros, which is the name of the third month of the
year; the fourth day of the month is called Anacan, which
is the name of the fourth month of the year; and so on with
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
all the rest, so that the thirty days of the intercalary month
bear the names of the twelve months of the year repeated
two and a half times.<note place='foot'>J. A. MacCulloch, in Dr. J.
Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics</hi>, iii. 79. Compare Sir J.
Rhys, <q>The Coligny Calendar,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the British Academy, 1909-1910</hi>, pp. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This seems to shew that, just as our
modern peasants regard the Twelve Days as representing
each a month of the year in their chronological order, so the
old Celts of Gaul who drew up the Coligny calendar regarded
the thirty days of the intercalary month as representing the
thirty ordinary months which were to follow it till the next
intercalation took place. And we may conjecture that just
as our modern peasants still draw omens from the Twelve
Days for the twelve succeeding months, so the old Celts
drew omens from the thirty days of the intercalary month
for the thirty months of the two and a half succeeding years.
Indeed we may suppose that the reformers of the calendar
transferred, or attempted to transfer, to the new intercalary
month the whole of the quaint customs and superstitions
which from time immemorial had clustered round the twelve
intercalary days of the old year. Thus, like the old Twelve
Days of midwinter, the thirty days of the new intercalary
month may have formed an interregnum or break in the
ordinary course of government, a tumultuary period of general
license, during which the ordinary rules of law and morality
were suspended and the direction of affairs committed to a
temporary and more or less farcical ruler or King of the
Bean, who may possibly have had to pay with his life for
his brief reign of thirty days. The floating traditions of
such merry monarchs and of the careless happy-go-lucky life
under them may have crystallized in after ages into the
legend of Saturn and the Golden Age. If that was so&mdash;and
I put forward the hypothesis for no more than a web
of conjectures woven from the gossamer threads of popular
superstition&mdash;we can understand why the Twelve Days,
intercalated every year in the old calendar, should have
survived to the present day in the memory of the people,
whereas the thirty days, intercalated every two and a half
years in the new calendar, have long been forgotten. It is
the simplest ideas that live longest in the simple minds
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
of the peasantry; and since the intercalation of twelve
days in every year to allow the lagging moon to keep
pace with the longer stride of the sun is certainly an easier
and more obvious expedient than to wait for two and
a half years till he has outrun her by thirty days, we need
not wonder that this ancient mode of harmonizing lunar and
solar time should have lingered in the recollection and in
the usages of the people ages after the more roundabout
method, which reflective minds had devised for accomplishing
the same end, had faded alike from the memory of the
peasant and the page of the historian.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Saturnalia and Lent.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Saturnalia and Lent.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
modern
Carnival is
perhaps the
equivalent
of the
ancient
Saturnalia.</note>
As the Carnival is always held on the last three days
before the beginning of Lent, its date shifts somewhat from
year to year, but it invariably falls either in February or
March. Hence it does not coincide with the date of the
Saturnalia, which within historical times seems to have been
always celebrated in December even in the old days, before
Caesar's reform of the calendar, when the Roman year ended
with February instead of December.<note place='foot'>We know from Livy (xxii. i. 19
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) that the Saturnalia was celebrated
in December as early as the year 217
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; and in his learned discussion
of the proper date of the festival the
antiquary Macrobius gives no hint that
it ever fell at any other time than in
December (<hi rend='italic'>Saturnal.</hi> i. 10). It would
be a mistake to infer from Livy's
account of the Saturnalia in the year
217 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> that he supposed the festival
to have been first instituted in that
year; for elsewhere (ii. 21. 1) he tells
us that it was established at the time
when the temple of Saturn was dedicated,
namely in the year 497 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
Macrobius (<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 8. 1) refers the
institution of the Saturnalia to King
Tullus Hostilius. More probably the
festival was of immemorial antiquity.</note> Yet if the Saturnalia,
like many other seasons of license, was originally celebrated
as a sort of public purification at the end of the old year or
the beginning of the new one, it may at a still more remote
period, when the Roman year began with March, have been
regularly held either in February or March and therefore at
approximately the same date as the modern Carnival. So
strong and persistent are the conservative instincts of the
peasantry in respect to old custom, that it would be no
matter for surprise if, in rural districts of Italy, the ancient
festival continued to be celebrated at the ancient time long
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
after the official celebration of the Saturnalia in the towns
had been shifted from February to December. Latin
Christianity, which struck at the root of official or civic
paganism, has always been tolerant of its rustic cousins, the
popular festivals and ceremonies which, unaffected by political
and religious revolutions, by the passing of empires and of
gods, have been carried on by the people with but little
change from time immemorial, and represent in fact the
original stock from which the state religions of classical
antiquity were comparatively late offshoots. Thus it may
very well have come about that while the new faith stamped
out the Saturnalia in the towns, it suffered the original
festival, disguised by a difference of date, to linger unmolested
in the country; and so the old feast of Saturn, under the
modern name of the Carnival, has reconquered the cities,
and goes on merrily under the eye and with the sanction of
the Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Saturnalia
may have
originally
fallen at
the end of
February,
which
would
be an
appropriate
time for a
festival of
sowing.</note>
The opinion that the Saturnalia originally fell in February
or the beginning of March receives some support from the
circumstance that the festival of the Matronalia, at which
mistresses feasted their slaves just as masters did theirs at
the Saturnalia, always continued to be held on the first of
March, even when the Roman year began with January.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> i. 12. 7; Solinus,
i. 35, p. 13 ed. Th. Mommsen (Berlin,
1864); Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De Mensibus</hi>,
iii. 15. On the other hand, we know
that the ceremony of renewing the
laurels, which originally took place on
the first of March, was long afterwards
transferred to the first of January. See
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, and Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 6, compared with
<hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xi. 2. 6, where the note of
the commentator Niclas may be consulted.
This transference is strictly
analogous to the change which I conjecture
to have been made in the date
of celebrating the Saturnalia.</note>
It is further not a little recommended by the consideration
that this date would be eminently appropriate for the festival
of Saturn, the old Italian god of sowing and planting. It
has always been a puzzle to explain why such a festival
should have been held at midwinter; but on the present
hypothesis the mystery vanishes. With the Italian farmer
February and March were the great season of the spring
sowing and planting;<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, books iii.
and iv. <hi rend='italic'>passim.</hi></note> nothing could be more natural than
that the husbandman should inaugurate the season with the
worship of the deity to whom he ascribed the function of
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
quickening the seed. It is no small confirmation of this
theory that the last day of the Carnival, namely Shrove
Tuesday, is still, or was down to recent times, the customary
season in Central Europe for promoting the growth of the
crops by means of leaps and dances.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 137-139.</note> The custom fits in
very well with the view which derives the Carnival from
an old festival of sowing such as the Saturnalia probably
was in its origin. Further, the orgiastic character of the
festival is readily explained by the help of facts which met
us in a former part of our investigation. We have seen
that between the sower and the seed there is commonly
supposed to exist a sympathetic connexion of such a nature
that his conduct directly affects and can promote or retard
the growth of the crops.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 136-144, ii. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> What wonder then if the simple
husbandman imagined that by cramming his belly, by
swilling and guzzling just before he proceeded to sow his
fields, he thereby imparted additional vigour to the seed?<note place='foot'>Compare C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown
Mexico</hi> (London, 1903), ii. 268: <q>To
the Huichol so closely are corn, deer,
and hikuli associated that by consuming
the broth of the deer-meat and the
hikuli they think the same effect is
produced&mdash;namely, making the corn
grow. Therefore when clearing the
fields they eat hikuli before starting the
day's work.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Lenten
fast in
spring may
be an old
heathen
period of
abstinence
intended
to promote
the growth
of the seed. Autumnal
rites of
mourning
and fasting
for the sake
of the seed.</note>
But while his crude philosophy may thus have painted
gluttony and intoxication in the agreeable colours of duties
which he owed to himself, to his family, and to the commonwealth,
it is possible that the zest with which he acquitted
himself of his obligations may have been whetted by a less
comfortable reflection. In modern times the indulgence of
the Carnival is immediately followed by the abstinence of
Lent; and if the Carnival is the direct descendant of the
Saturnalia, may not Lent in like manner be merely the continuation,
under a thin disguise, of a period of temperance
which was annually observed, from superstitious motives,
by Italian farmers long before the Christian era? Direct
evidence of this, so far as I am aware, is not forthcoming;
but we have seen that a practice of abstinence from fleshly
lusts has been observed by various peoples as a sympathetic
charm to foster the growth of the seed;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The Indians
of Santiago Tepehuacan abstain from
flesh, eggs, and grease while they are
engaged in sowing cotton and chilis,
because they believe that were they to
partake of these viands at that time, the
blossoms would fall and the crop would
suffer. See <q>Lettre du curé de Santiago
Tepehuacan à son évêque sur les mœurs
et coutumes des Indiens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris),
Deuxième Série, ii. (1834) p. 181.</note> and such an
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
observance would be an appropriate sequel to the Saturnalia,
if that festival was indeed, as I conjecture it to have been,
originally held in spring as a religious or magical preparation
for sowing and planting. When we consider how widely
diffused is the belief in the sympathetic influence which
human conduct, and especially the intercourse of the sexes,
exerts on the fruits of the earth, we may be allowed to
conjecture that the Lenten fast, with the rule of continence
which is recommended, if not strictly enjoined, by the
Catholic and Coptic churches during that season,<note place='foot'>In Franche-Comté not only
husbands and wives were expected to
be continent from the first Sunday of
Lent to the first Sunday after Easter,
but even sweethearts separated during
that time, bidding each other a formal
farewell on the first of these days and
meeting again with similar formality on
the last. See C. Beauquier, <hi rend='italic'>Les Mois
en Franche-Comté</hi> (Paris, 1900), p. 35.
I am informed that the observance of
chastity during Lent is enjoined generally
by the Catholic church. As to its
injunction by the Coptic church see
F. Wüstenfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Macrizi's Geschichte der
Copten</hi> (Göttingen, 1845), p. 84; <hi rend='italic'>Il</hi>
Fetha Nagast, <hi rend='italic'>o Legislazione dei Re,
codice ecclesiastico e civile di Abissinia,
tradotto e annotato da</hi> Ignazio Guidi
(Rome, 1899), p. 164.</note> was in its
origin intended, not so much to commemorate the sufferings
of a dying god, as to foster the growth of the seed, which in
the bleak days of early spring the husbandman commits
with anxious care and misgiving to the bosom of the naked
earth. Ecclesiastical historians have been puzzled to say
why after much hesitation and great diversity of usage in
different places the Christian church finally adopted forty
days as the proper period for the mournful celebration of
Lent.<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Ecclesiastica</hi>,
v. 22; Sozomenus, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Ecclesiastica</hi>,
vii. 19 (Migne, <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia
Graeca</hi>, lxvii. coll. 632-636, 1477);
W. Smith and S. Cheetham, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary
of Christian Antiquities</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Lent,</q>
vol. ii. pp. 972 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mgr. L. Duchesne,
<hi rend='italic'>Origines du Culte Chrétien</hi> (Paris,
1903), pp. 241-243.</note> Perhaps in coming to this decision the authorities
were guided, as so often, by a regard for an existing pagan
celebration of similar character and duration which they
hoped by a change of name to convert into a Christian
solemnity. Such a heathen Lent they may have found to
hand in the rites of Persephone, the Greek goddess of the corn,
whose image, carved out of a tree, was annually brought into
the cities and mourned for forty nights, after which it was
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
burned.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore
profanarum religionum</hi>, 27.</note> The time of year when these lamentations took
place is not mentioned by the old Christian writer who
records them; but they would fall most appropriately at the
season when the seed was sown or, in mythical language,
when the corn-goddess was buried, which in ancient Italy, as
we saw, was done above all in the months of February and
March. We know that at the time of the autumnal sowing
Greek women held a sad and serious festival because the
Corn-goddess Persephone or the Maiden, as they called
her, then went down into the earth with the sown grain,
and Demeter fondly mourned her daughter's absence;
hence in sympathy with the sorrowful mother the women
likewise mourned and observed a solemn fast and abstained
from the marriage bed.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 69: καὶ
γὰρ Ἀθήνῃσι νηστεύουσιν αἱ γυναῖκες ἐν
θεσμοφορίοις χαμαὶ καθήμεναι, καὶ Βοιωτοὶ
τὰ τῆς Ἀχαιᾶς μέγαρα κινοῦσιν, ἐπαχθῆ
τὴν ἑορτὴν ἐκείνην ὀνομάζοντες, ὡς διὰ
τὴν τῆς Κόρης κάθοδον ἐν ἄχει τῆς
Δήμητρος οὕσης. Ἔστι δὲ ὁ μὴν οὗτος
περὶ πλειάδα σπόριμος, ὂν Ἀθὺρ Αἰγύπτιοι,
Πυανεψιῶνα δ᾽ Ἀθηναῖοι, Βοιωτοὶ δὲ
Δαμάτριον καλοῦσι. As to the festival
and the rule of chastity observed at it,
see further <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of
the Wild</hi>, i. 116, ii. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is reasonable, therefore, to
suppose that they practised similar rules of mourning
and abstinence for a like reason at the time of the
spring sowing, and that the ancient ritual survives in the
modern Lent, which preserves the memory of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mater
Dolorosa</foreign>, though it has substituted a dead Son for a dead
Daughter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Buddhist
Lent.</note>
Be that as it may, it is worthy of note that in
Burma a similar fast, which English writers call the
Buddhist Lent, is observed for three months every year
while the ploughing and sowing of the fields go forward;
and the custom is believed to be far older than Buddhism,
which has merely given it a superficial tinge like the
veneer of Christianity which, if I am right, has overlaid
an old heathen observance in Lent. This Burmese
Lent, we are told, covers the rainy season from the full
moon of July to the full moon of October. <q>This is the
time to plough, this is the time to sow; on the villagers'
exertions in these months depends all their maintenance for
the rest of the year. Every man, every woman, every child,
has hard work of some kind or another. And so, what with
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
the difficulties of travelling, what with the work there is
to do, and what with the custom of Lent, every one stays at
home. It is the time for prayer, for fasting, for improving
the soul. Many men during these months will live even as
the monks live, will eat but before midday, will abstain from
tobacco. There are no plays during Lent, and there are no
marriages. It is the time for preparing the land for the
crop; it is the time for preparing the soul for eternity. The
congregations on the Sundays will be far greater at this time
than at any other; there will be more thought of the serious
things of life.</q><note place='foot'>H. Fielding, <hi rend='italic'>The Soul of a People</hi>
(London, 1898), pp. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
orthodox explanation of the custom is
that during these three months the
Buddha retired to a monastery. But
<q>the custom was far older even than
that&mdash;so old that we do not know how
it arose. Its origin is lost in the mists
of far-away time.</q> Compare C. J. F. S.
Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi> (London,
1878), pp. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The
Burman, his Life and Notions</hi>
(London, 1882), i. 257, 262 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Saturnalia in Ancient Greece.'/>
<head>§ 4. Saturnalia in Ancient Greece.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inversion
of social
ranks at
ancient
Greek
festivals
held in
Crete,
Troezen,
and
Thessaly.</note>
Beyond the limits of Italy festivals of the same general
character as the Saturnalia appear to have been held over a
considerable area of the ancient world. A characteristic
feature of the Saturnalia, as we saw, was an inversion of
social ranks, masters changing places with their slaves and
waiting upon them, while slaves were indulged with a
semblance not merely of freedom but even of power and
office. In various parts of Greece the same hollow show of
granting liberty to slaves was made at certain festivals.
Thus at a Cretan festival of Hermes the servants feasted
and their masters waited upon them. In the month of
Geraestius the Troezenians observed a certain solemnity
lasting many days, on one of which the slaves played at
dice with the citizens and were treated to a banquet by their
lords. The Thessalians held a great festival called Peloria,
which Baton of Sinope identified with the Saturnalia, and of
which the antiquity is vouched for by a tradition that it
originated with the Pelasgians. At this festival sacrifices
were offered to Pelorian Zeus, tables splendidly adorned
were set out, all strangers were invited to the feast, all
prisoners released, and the slaves sat down to the banquet,
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
enjoyed full freedom of speech, and were served by their
masters.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, xiv. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, pp. 639 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B</hi>-640
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Greek
festival of
the Cronia
compared
to the
Roman
Saturnalia. The
Olympian
Cronia
held at
the spring
equinox.</note>
But the Greek festival which appears to have corresponded
most closely to the Italian Saturnalia was the
Cronia or festival of Cronus, a god whose barbarous myth
and cruel ritual clearly belong to a very early stratum of
Greek religion, and who was by the unanimous voice of
antiquity identified with Saturn. We are told that his
festival was celebrated in most parts of Greece, but especially
at Athens, where the old god and his wife Rhea had a shrine
near the stately, but far more modern, temple of Olympian
Zeus. A joyous feast, at which masters and slaves sat down
together, formed a leading feature of the solemnity. At Athens
the festival fell in the height of summer, on the twelfth day of
the month Hecatombaeon, formerly called the month of
Cronus, which answered nearly to July; and tradition ran that
Cecrops, the first king of Attica, had founded an altar in
honour of Cronus and Rhea, and had ordained that master
and man should share a common meal when the harvest
was got in.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 7. 37 and i.
10. 22; Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> xxiv. 26, p.
708. As to the temple of Cronus and
Rhea, see Pausanias, i. 18. 7; Im.
Bekker's <hi rend='italic'>Anecdota Graeca</hi> (Berlin,
1814-1821), i. p. 273, lines 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
That the Attic month Hecatombaeon
was formerly called Cronius is mentioned
by Plutarch (<hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi>, 12). Other
Greek states, including Samos, Amorgos,
Perinthus, and Patmos, had a month
called Cronion, that is, the month of
Cronus, which seems to have coincided
with June or July. See G.
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1898-1901),
Nos. 644 and 645; E. Bischoff,
<q>De fastis Graecorum antiquioribus,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Leipziger Studien für classischen
Philologie</hi>, vii. (1884) p. 400. At
Magnesia on the Maeander the month
of Cronion was the time of sowing
(Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 553, lines
15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), which cannot have fallen in the
height of summer. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Spirits
of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, ii. 8.</note> Yet there are indications that at Athens the
Cronia may once have been a spring festival. For a cake
with twelve knobs, which perhaps referred to the twelve
months of the year, was offered to Cronus by the Athenians
on the fifteenth day of the month Elaphebolion, which
corresponded roughly to March,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum</hi>,
iii. No. 77; Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi> (Brussels, 1900),
No. 692, pp. 595 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; I. de Prott
et L. Ziehen, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Graecorum Sacrae</hi>,
i. (Leipsic, 1896), No. 3, pp. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner,
<hi rend='italic'>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</hi>, Part
II. (Cambridge, 1905), No. 142, pp.
387 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> From the same inscription
we learn that cakes with twelve knobs
were offered to other deities, including
Apollo and Artemis, Zeus, Poseidon,
and Hercules.</note> and there are traces of a
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
license accorded to slaves at the Dionysiac festival of the
opening of the wine-jars, which fell on the eleventh day of
the preceding month Anthesterion.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and
Days</hi>, 370 (p. 170 ed. E. Vollbehr,
Kiel, 1844): Καὶ ἐν τοῖς πατρίοις ἐστιν
ἑορτὴ Πιθοιγία, καθ᾽ ἣν οὒτε οἰκέτην
οὔτε μισθωτὸν εἴργειν τῆς ἀπολαύσεως
τοῦ οἴνου θεμιτὸν ἦν, ἀλλὰ θύσαντας
πᾶσι μεταδιδόναι τοῦ δώρου τοῦ Διονύσου.
As to the festival of the opening of the
wine-jars see August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>
(Leipsic, 1864), pp. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi>
(Leipsic, 1898), pp. 384 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> <q>When
the slaves,</q> says Plutarch, <q>feast at
the Cronia or go about celebrating the
festival of Dionysus in the country, the
shouts they raise and the tumult they
make in their rude merriment are intolerable</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Non posse suaviter vivi
secundum Epicurum</hi>, 26). That the
original festival of Cronus fell at Athens
in Anthesterion is the view of Aug.
Mommsen (<hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>, pp. 22, 79;
<hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen</hi>, p. 402).</note> At Olympia the festival
of Cronus undoubtedly occurred in spring; for here a low
but steep hill, now covered with a tangled growth of dark
holly-oaks and firs, was sacred to him, and on its top certain
magistrates, who bore the title of kings, offered sacrifice to the
old god at the vernal equinox in the Elean month Elaphius.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, vi. 20. 1. Compare
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> i. 34. The magistrates called
<q>kings</q> (βασίλαι) by Pausanias are
doubtless identical with <q>the kings</q>
(τοὶ βασιλᾶες) mentioned in a law of
Elis, which was found inscribed on a
bronze plate at Olympia. See H.
Roehl, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones Graecae Antiquissimae</hi>
(Berlin, 1882), No. 112, p. 39;
C. Cauer, <hi rend='italic'>Delectus Inscriptionum
Graecarum propter dialectum memorabilium</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Leipsic, 1883), No. 253, p.
175; H. Collitz, <hi rend='italic'>Sammlung der
griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften</hi>, No.
1152 (vol. i. Göttingen, 1884, p. 321);
Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi>, No. 195, p. 179.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
magistrates
called
Kings who
celebrated
the Cronia
at Olympia
may have
personated
King
Cronus
himself. Perhaps
the man
who
annually
personated
King
Cronus
was put to
death. A man
annually
sacrificed
to Cronus
at the
Cronia in
Rhodes.</note>
In this last ceremony, which probably went on year by
year long before the upstart Zeus had a temple built for
himself at the foot of the hill, there are two points of special
interest, first the date of the ceremony, and second the title
of the celebrants. First, as to the date, the spring equinox,
or the twenty-first of March, must have fallen so near the
fifteenth day of the Athenian month Elaphebolion, that
we may fairly ask whether the Athenian custom of offering
a cake to Cronus on that day may not also have been an
equinoctial ceremony. In the second place, the title of
kings borne by the magistrates who sacrificed to Cronus
renders it probable that, like magistrates with similar high-sounding
titles elsewhere in republican Greece, they were
the lineal descendants of sacred kings whom the superstition
of their subjects invested with the attributes of divinity.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. 177, 361.</note>
If that was so, it would be natural enough that one of these
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
nominal kings should pose as the god Cronus in person.
For, like his Italian counterpart Saturn, the Greek Cronus
was believed to have been a king who reigned in heaven or
on earth during the blissful Golden Age, when men passed
their days like gods without toil or sorrow, when life was a
long round of festivity, and death came like sleep, sudden
but gentle, announced by none of his sad forerunners, the
ailments and infirmities of age.<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 111,
169; Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Politicus</hi>, p. 269 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>;
Diodorus Siculus, iii. 61, v. 66;
Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Epistola ad Themistium</hi>, p.
258 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi> (pp. 334 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. F. C. Hertlein,
Leipsic, 1875-1876); <q>Anonymi
Chronologica,</q> printed in L. Dindorf's
edition of J. Malalas (Bonn, 1831), p.
17. See further M. Mayer's article
<q>Kronos,</q> in W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon
der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii.
(Leipsic, 1890-1897) col. 1458.</note> Thus the analogy of the
Olympian Cronia, probably one of the oldest of Greek
festivals, to the Italian Saturnalia would be very close if
originally, as I conjecture, the Saturnalia fell in spring and
Saturn was personated at it, as we have good reason to
believe, by a man dressed as a king. May we go a step
further and suppose that, just as the man who acted King
Saturn at the Saturnalia was formerly slain in that character,
so one of the kings who celebrated the Cronia at Olympia
not only played the part of Cronus, but was sacrificed, as
god and victim in one, on the top of the hill? Cronus
certainly bore a sinister reputation in antiquity. He passed
for an unnatural parent who had devoured his own offspring,
and he was regularly identified by the Greeks with the cruel
Semitic Baals who delighted in the sacrifice of human
victims, especially of children.<note place='foot'>See M. Mayer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 1501
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> A legend which savours
strongly of infant sacrifice is reported of a shrine that stood
at the very foot of the god's own hill at Olympia;<note place='foot'>Pausanias, vi. 20. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and a
quite unambiguous story was told of the sacrifice of a babe
to Lycaean Zeus on Mount Lycaeus in Arcadia, where the
worship of Zeus was probably nothing but a continuation,
under a new name, of the old worship of Cronus, and where
human victims appear to have been regularly offered down
to the Christian era.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi>, ix. p. 565 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d e</hi>;
pseudo-Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Minos</hi>, p. 315 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Pliny,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 81; Pausanias, viii. 2
and 38; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii.
27; Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, xviii.
17. The suggestion that Lycaean
Zeus may have been merely a successor
of Cronus is due to my friend Professor
W. Ridgeway.</note> The Rhodians annually sacrificed a
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
man to Cronus in the month Metageitnion; at a later time
they kept a condemned criminal in prison till the festival of
the Cronia was come, then led him forth outside the gates,
made him drunk with wine, and cut his throat.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 54.</note> With the
parallel of the Saturnalia before our eyes, we may surmise
that the victim who thus ended his life in a state of
intoxication at the Cronia perhaps personated King Cronus
himself, the god who reigned in the happy days of old
when men had nothing to do but to eat and drink and
make merry. At least the Rhodian custom lends some
countenance to the conjecture that formerly a human victim
may have figured at the sacrifice which the so-called kings
offered to Cronus on his hill at Olympia. In this connexion
it is to be remembered that we have already found
well-attested examples of a custom of sacrificing the scions
of royal houses in ancient Greece.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If the god to whom, or
perhaps rather in whose character, the princes were sacrificed,
was Cronus, it would be natural that the Greeks of a
later age should identify him with Baal or Moloch, to whom
in like manner Semitic kings offered up their children. The
Laphystian Zeus of Thessaly and Boeotia, whom tradition
associated with these human sacrifices, was probably, like
the Lycaean Zeus of Arcadia, nothing but the aboriginal
deity, commonly known as Cronus, whose gloomy rites the
Greek invaders suffered the priests of the vanquished race to
continue after the ancient manner, while they quieted their
scruples of conscience or satisfied their pride as conquerors
by investing the bloodthirsty old savage with the name, if
not with the character, of their own milder deity, the humane
and gracious Zeus.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Saturnalia in Western Asia.'/>
<head>§ 5. Saturnalia in Western Asia.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Babylonian
festival of
the Sacaea.</note>
When we pass from Europe to western Asia, from
ancient Greece to ancient Babylon and the regions where
Babylonian influence penetrated, we are still met with festivals
which bear the closest resemblance to the oldest form
of the Italian Saturnalia. The reader may remember the
festival of the Sacaea, on which I had occasion to touch in
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
an earlier part of this work.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It was held at Babylon
during five days of the month Lous, beginning with the
sixteenth day of the month. During its continuance, just
as at the Saturnalia, masters and servants changed places,
the servants issuing orders and the masters obeying them;
and in each house one of the servants, dressed as a king
and bearing the title of Zoganes, bore rule over the household.
Further, just as at the Saturnalia in its original form
a man was dressed as King Saturn in royal robes, allowed
to indulge his passions and caprices to the full, and then
put to death, so at the Sacaea a condemned prisoner, who
probably also bore for the time being the title of Zoganes, was
arrayed in the king's attire and suffered to play the despot,
to use the king's concubines, and to give himself up to
feasting and debauchery without restraint, only however in
the end to be stript of his borrowed finery, scourged, and
hanged or crucified.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, xiv. 44, p. 639 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>;
Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> iv. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (vol.
i. p. 76 ed. L. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1857).
From Athenaeus we learn that the
festival was described or mentioned by
Berosus in his first book and by Ctesias
in his second.</note> From Strabo we learn that this Asiatic
counterpart of the Saturnalia was celebrated in Asia Minor
wherever the worship of the Persian goddess Anaitis had
established itself. He describes it as a Bacchic orgy, at
which the revellers were disguised as Scythians, and men
and women drank and dallied together by day and night.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xi. 8. 5, p. 512.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Sacaea
by some
identified
with Zakmuk
or
Zagmuk,
the
Babylonian
festival of
the New
Year, which
was held
about the
spring
equinox in
March.
Annual
renewal of
the king of
Babylon's
power at
the Zakmuk
festival.</note>
As the worship of Anaitis, though of Persian origin,
appears to have been deeply leavened with coarse elements
which it derived from the religion of Babylon,<note place='foot'>Strabo, xi. 14. 16, pp. 532 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Ed. Meyer's article <q>Anaitis,</q> in
W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech.
und röm. Mythologie</hi>, i. (Leipsic, 1884-1890)
pp. 330 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> we may
perhaps regard Mesopotamia as the original home from
which the Sacaean festival spread westward into other parts
of Asia Minor. Now the Sacaean festival, described by the
Babylonian priest Berosus in the first book of his history
of Babylon, has been plausibly identified<note place='foot'>By A. H. Sayce, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Babylonians</hi> (London and
Edinburgh, 1887), p. 68; Bruno
Meissner, <q>Zur Entstehungsgeschichte
des Purimfestes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der deutschen
morgenländischen Gesellschaft</hi>, l.
(1896) pp. 296-301; H. Winckler,
<hi rend='italic'>Altorientalische Forschungen</hi>, Zweite
Reihe, ii. Heft 3 (Leipsic, 1900), p.
345; C. Brockelmann, <q>Wesen und
Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</hi>, xvi. (1902)
pp. 391 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> with the great
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
Babylonian festival of the New year called Zakmuk, Zagmuk,
Zakmuku, or Zagmuku, which has become known to us
in recent times through inscriptions. The Babylonian year
began with the spring month of Nisan, which seems to have
covered the second half of March and the first half of April.
Thus the New Year festival, which occupied at least the first
eleven days of Nisan, probably included the spring equinox.
It was held in honour of Marduk or Merodach, the chief god
of Babylon, whose great temple of Esagila in the city formed
the religious centre of the solemnity. For here, in a splendid
chamber of the vast edifice, all the gods were believed to
assemble at this season under the presidency of Marduk for
the purpose of determining the fates for the new year,
especially the fate of the king's life. On this occasion the
king of Babylon was bound annually to renew his regal
power by grasping the hands of the image of Marduk in his
temple, as if to signify that he received the kingdom directly
from the deity and was unable without the divine assistance
and authority to retain it for more than a year. Unless
he thus formally reinstated himself on the throne once
a year, the king ceased to reign legitimately. When
Babylonia was conquered by Assyria, the Assyrian monarchs
themselves used to come to Babylon and perform the
ceremony of grasping the god's hands in order to establish
by this solemn act their title to the kingdom which they
had won for themselves by the sword; until they had done
so, they were not recognized as kings by their Babylonian
subjects. Some of them indeed found the ceremony either
so burdensome or so humiliating to their pride as conquerors,
that rather than perform it they renounced the title of king
of Babylon altogether and contented themselves with the
more modest title of regent. Another notable feature of the
Babylonian festival of the New Year appears to have been a
ceremonial marriage of the god Marduk; for in a hymn
relating to the solemnity it is said of the deity that <q>he
hastened to his bridal.</q> The festival was of hoar antiquity,
for it was known to Gudea, an old king of Southern
Babylonia who flourished between two and three thousand
years before the beginning of our era, and it is
mentioned in an early account of the Great Flood. At
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
a much later period it is repeatedly referred to by King
Nebuchadnezzar and his successors. Nebuchadnezzar records
how he built of bricks and bitumen a chapel or altar, <q>a
thing of joy and rejoicing,</q> for the great festival of Marduk,
the lord of the gods; and we read of the rich and abundant
offerings which were made by the high priest at this time.<note place='foot'>P. Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Kosmologie der
Babylonier</hi> (Strasburg, 1890), pp. 84
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Zimmern, <q>Zur Frage nach
dem Ursprunge des Purimfestes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft</hi>,
xi. (1891) pp. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
A. Jeremias, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Marduk,</q> in W. H.
Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon der griech. und röm.
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 2347 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; M. Jastrow,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</hi>
(Boston, U.S.A., 1898), pp. 186, 677
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. F. Harper, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and
Babylonian Literature</hi> (New York,
1901), pp. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 137, 140, 149;
C. Brocklemann, <q>Wesen und Ursprung
des Eponymats in Assyrien,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</hi>, xvi. (1902)
pp. 391 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Zimmern, in E.
Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das
Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1902), pp.
370 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 374, 384 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, 402, 514 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Zum Babylonischen Neujahrsfest,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Berichte über die Verhandlungen
der königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Philologisch-historische
Klasse</hi>, lviii. (1906)
pp. 126-156; M. J. Lagrange, <hi rend='italic'>Études
sur les Religions Sémitiques</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Paris,
1905); pp. 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> King Gudea is
thought to have flourished about 2340
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> See Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. (Stuttgart and Berlin,
1909) pp. 488 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the
ceremony of grasping the hands of
Marduk's image, see also C. F.
Lehmann (-Haupt), <hi rend='italic'>Šamaššumukin,
König von Babylonien</hi> (Leipsic, 1892),
pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Sir G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient
Classique</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Les Empires</hi> (Paris,
1899). pp. 381 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reasons for
identifying
the Sacaea
with
Zakmuk.</note>
Unfortunately the notices of this Babylonian festival of
the New Year which have come down to us deal chiefly
with its mythical aspect and throw little light on the mode
of its celebration. Hence its identity with the Sacaea must
remain for the present a more or less probable hypothesis.
In favour of the hypothesis may be alleged in the first place
the resemblance of the names Sacaea and Zoganes to
Zakmuk or Zagmuku, if that was the real pronunciation
of the name,<note place='foot'>On this subject the Master of St.
Catharine's College, Cambridge (the
Rev. C. H. W. Johns), has kindly
furnished me with the following note:
<q>ZAG is the name of the ideogram
meaning <q>head or beginning.</q> MU
is the sign for <q>year.</q> When put together
ZAG-MU means <q>beginning of
year.</q> But ZAG-MU-KU means ZAG
MU-d, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> ZAG with MU suffixed.
Therefore it is the name of the ideogram,
and there is as yet no <emph>proof</emph> that
it was ever read Zakmuk. Hence any
similarity of sound with either Sacaea
or Zoganes is precarious. I cannot
prove that the signs were <emph>never</emph> read
Zakmuku, but that is not a Semitic
word nor a Sumerian word.</q></note> and in the second place the very significant
statement that the fate of the king's life was supposed
to be determined by the gods, under the presidency
of Marduk, at the Zakmuk or New Year's festival.<note place='foot'>The statement occurs in an inscription
of Nebuchadnezzar. See P.
Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Kosmologie der Babylonier</hi>,
p. 85; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's
<hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1902), p. 402. The
title of the president of the divine synod,
<q>king of the gods of heaven and earth,</q>
is believed by Professor Zimmern to have
originally referred to the god Nabu,
though at a later time it was applied to
Marduk.</note> When
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
we remember that the central feature of the Sacaea appears
to have been the saving of the king's life for another year
by the vicarious sacrifice of a criminal on the cross or the
gallows, we can understand that the season was a critical
one for the king, and that it may well have been regarded
as determining his fate for the ensuing twelve months. The
annual ceremony of renewing the king's power by contact
with the god's image, which formed a leading feature
of the Zakmuk festival, would be very appropriately
performed immediately after the execution or sacrifice of
the temporary king who died in the room of the real
monarch.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A difficulty
in identifying
the
Sacaea
with Zakmuk
is that
the two
festivals
seem to
have been
celebrated
at different
times of
the year,
Zakmuk
falling in
March and
the Sacaea
in July. Suggested
ways of
meeting
the difficulty.</note>
A difficulty, however, in the way of identifying the Sacaea
with the Zakmuk arises from the statement of Berosus that
the Sacaea fell on the sixteenth day of Lous, which was the
tenth month of the Syro-Macedonian calendar and appears
to have nearly coincided with July. Thus if the Sacaea
occurred in July and the Zakmuk in March, the theory
of their identity could not be maintained. But the dating
of the months of the Syro-Macedonian calendar is a
matter of some uncertainty; the month of Lous in particular
appears to have fallen at different times of the year
in different places,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>See The Dying God</hi>, p. 116 note 1.
In Egypt the Macedonian calendar
seems to have fallen into great confusion.
See W. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Orientis
Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</hi> (Leipsic,
1903-1905), ii. pp. 649 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> I would
remind the reader that while the <emph>dates</emph>
of the Syro-Macedonian months varied
in different places, their <emph>order</emph> was the
same everywhere.</note> and until we have ascertained beyond
the reach of doubt when Lous fell at Babylon in the time of
Berosus, it would be premature to allow much weight to the
seeming discrepancy in the dates of the two festivals. At
all events, whether the festivals were the same or different,
we are confronted with difficulties which in the present state
of our knowledge may be pronounced insoluble. If the
festivals were the same, we cannot explain their apparent
difference of date: if they were different, we cannot explain
their apparent similarity of character. In what follows I
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
shall, with some eminent Oriental scholars,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, note 5. On the
other hand Prof. H. Zimmern prefers
to suppose that the Sacaea was quite
distinct from Zakmuk, and that it
fell in July at the time of the heliacal
rising of Sirius, which seems to have
been associated with the goddess Ishtar.
See H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's
<hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1902), pp. 426 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> provisionally
assume the identity of Zakmuk and Sacaea, but I would ask
the reader to bear clearly in mind that the hypothesis leaves
the apparent discrepancy of their dates unexplained. Towards
a solution of the problem I can only suggest conjecturally
either that the date of the festival had been for some reason
shifted in the time of Berosus, or that two different festivals
of the same type may have been held at different seasons of
the year, one in spring and one in summer, perhaps by two
distinct but kindred tribes, who retained their separate
religious rites after they had coalesced in the Babylonian
empire. Both conjectures might be supported by analogies.
On the one hand, for example, in the Jewish calendar New
Year's Day was shifted under Babylonian influence from
autumn to spring,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Year,</q>
vol. iv. (London, 1903) coll. 5365 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and in a later part of this work we shall
see that the Chinese festival of new fire, at first celebrated in
spring, was afterwards shifted to the summer solstice, only
however to be brought back at a later time to its original
date. On the other hand, the popular festivals of our
European peasantry afford many examples of rites which
appear to be similar in character, though they fall at different
times of the year; such, for instance, are the ceremonies
concerned with vegetation on May Day, Whitsuntide, and
Midsummer Day,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and the fire festivals which are distributed
at still wider intervals throughout the months.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>, Second Edition,
iii. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Similarly
in ancient Italy the agricultural festival of the Ambarvalia
was celebrated by Italian farmers at different dates in
different places.<note place='foot'>J. Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Leipsic, 1885), pp. 200
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These cases may warn us against the
danger of hastily inferring an essential difference between
Zakmuk and Sacaea on the ground of a real or apparent
difference in their dates.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>An argument
for
identifying
Sacaea and
Zakmuk
is the
apparent
connexion
of both
with the
Jewish
festival
of Purim.</note>
A fresh and powerful argument in favour of the identity
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
of the two festivals is furnished by the connexion which has
been traced between both of them and the Jewish feast of
Purim.<note place='foot'>H. Zimmern, <q>Zur Frage nach
dem Ursprunge des Purimfestes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft</hi>,
xi. (1891) pp. 157-169; W.
Nowack, <hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der hebräischen
Archäologie</hi> (Freiburg i. B. and Leipsic,
1894), ii. 198 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Br. Meissner,
<q>Zur Entstehungsgeschichte des Purimfestes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, l. (1896) pp.
296-301; Fr. Cumont, <q>Le roi des
Saturnales,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de Philologie</hi>, xxi.
(1897) p. 150; P. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Purim</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906). The various theories
which have been propounded as to
the origin of Purim are stated and
discussed by Prof. L. B. Paton in
his <hi rend='italic'>Commentary on the Book of Esther</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1908), pp. 77-94. See
also <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Purim,</q>
vol. iii. (London, 1902) coll. 3976
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> There are good grounds for believing that Purim
was unknown to the Jews until after the exile, and that they
learned to observe it during their captivity in the East.
The festival is first mentioned in the book of Esther, which
by the majority of critics is assigned to the fourth or third
century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,<note place='foot'>S. R. Driver, <hi rend='italic'>Introduction to the
Literature of the Old Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1909), p. 484. Professor
T. Witton Davies would date the book
about 130 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> See <hi rend='italic'>Ezra, Nehemiah
and Esther</hi>, edited by Rev. T. Witton
Davies (Edinburgh and London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
pp. 299-301 (<hi rend='italic'>The Century Bible</hi>).</note> and which certainly cannot be older than the
Persian period, since the scene of the narrative is laid in Susa
at the court of a Persian king Ahasuerus, whose name appears
to be the Hebrew equivalent of Xerxes. The next reference
to Purim occurs in the second book of Maccabees, a work
written probably about the beginning of our era.<note place='foot'>2 Maccabees xv. 36. As to the
date of this book, see S. R. Driver,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 481.</note> Thus
from the absence of all notice of Purim in the older books
of the Bible, we may fairly conclude that the festival was
instituted or imported at a comparatively late date among
the Jews. The same conclusion is supported by the book
of Esther itself, which was manifestly written to explain the
origin of the feast and to suggest motives for its observance.
For, according to the author of the book, the festival was
established to commemorate the deliverance of the Jews
from a great danger which threatened them in Persia under
the reign of King Xerxes. Thus the opinion of modern
scholars that the feast of Purim, as celebrated by the Jews,
was of late date and oriental origin, is borne out by the
tradition of the Jews themselves. An examination of that
tradition and the mode of celebrating the feast renders
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
it probable that Purim is nothing but a more or less
disguised form of the Babylonian festival of the Sacaea or
Zakmuk.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Jewish
festival
of Purim
seems to
be derived
from the
Babylonian
festival of
Zakmuk.</note>
In the first place, the feast of Purim was and is held on
the fourteenth and fifteenth days of Adar, the last month
of the Jewish year, which corresponds roughly to March.<note place='foot'>We know from Josephus (<hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.</hi>
iii. 10. 5) that in the month Nisan,
the first month of the Jewish year, the
sun was in Aries. Now the sun is in
Aries from March 20th or 21st to
April 19th or 20th; hence Nisan
answers approximately to April, and
Adar to March.</note>
Thus the date agrees nearly, though not exactly, with the
date of the Babylonian Zakmuk, which fell a fortnight later
in the early days of the following month Nisan. A trace
of the original celebration of Purim in Nisan may perhaps
be found in the statement that <q>they cast Pur, that is, the
lot, before Haman</q> in Nisan, the first month of the year.<note place='foot'>Esther iii. 7.</note>
It has been suggested with some plausibility that the Jews
may have shifted the date of Purim in order that the new
and foreign festival might not clash with their own old
festival of the Passover, which began on the fourteenth day
of Nisan. Another circumstance which speaks at once for
the alien origin of Purim and for its identity with Zakmuk
is its name. The author of the book of Esther derives the
name Purim from <foreign rend='italic'>pur</foreign>, <q>a lot,</q><note place='foot'>Esther iii. 7, ix. 26.</note> but no such word with
this signification exists in Hebrew, and hence we are driven
to look for the meaning and etymology of Purim in some
other language. A specious theory is that the name was
derived from an Assyrian word <foreign rend='italic'>puvru</foreign>, <q>an assembly,</q> and
referred primarily to the great assembly of the gods which,
as we have seen, formed a chief feature of the festival of
Zakmuk, and was held annually in the temple of Marduk
at Babylon for the purpose of determining the fates or
lots of the new year;<note place='foot'>This is the view of H. Zimmern
(<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche
Wissenschaft</hi>, xi. (1891) pp. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>),
and it is favoured by W. Nowack
(<hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der hebräischen Archäologie</hi>,
ii. 198 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). Compare H. Zimmern,
in E. Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften
und das Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin,
1902), p. 518.</note> the august assembly appears to
have been occasionally, if not regularly, designated by the
very name <foreign rend='italic'>puvru</foreign>.<note place='foot'>P. Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Kosmologie der
Babylonier</hi>, pp. 240 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On this hypothesis the traditional
Jewish explanation of the name Purim preserved a genuine
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
kernel of historical truth, or at least of mythical fancy, under
the husk of a verbal error; for the name, if this derivation
of it is correct, really signified, not <q>the lots,</q> but the
assembly for drawing or otherwise determining the lots.
Another explanation which has been offered is <q>that <foreign rend='italic'>pūr</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>būr</foreign> seems to be an old Assyrian word for <q>stone,</q> and
that therefore it is possible that the word was also used to
signify <q>lot,</q> like the Hebrew גורל <q>lot,</q> which originally, no
doubt, meant <q>little stone.</q></q><note place='foot'>The explanation is that of P.
Jensen, quoted by Th. Nöldeke in
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Esther,</q>
vol. ii. (London, 1901) col. 1404 note 1.
In Greek, for a similar reason, the
word for <q>pebble</q> and <q>vote</q> is
identical (ψῆφος). As to this etymology
see also C. H. W. Johns, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Purim,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, iii. (London,
1902) coll. 3979 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Either of these explanations
of the name Purim, by tracing it back to the New Year
assembly of the gods at Babylon for settling the lots,
furnishes an adequate explanation of the traditional association
of Purim with the casting of lots&mdash;an association all
the more remarkable and all the more likely to be ancient
because there is nothing to justify it either in the Hebrew
language or in the Jewish mode of celebrating the festival.
When to this we add the joyous, nay, extravagant festivity
which has always been characteristic of Purim, and is entirely
in keeping with a New Year celebration, we may perhaps
be thought to have made out a fairly probable case for
holding that the Jewish feast is derived from the Babylonian
New Year festival of Zakmuk. Whether the Jews borrowed
the feast directly from the Babylonians or indirectly through
the Persian conquerors of Babylon is a question which
deserves to be considered; but the Persian colouring of
the book of Esther speaks strongly for the view that Purim
came to Israel by way of Persia, or at all events from
Babylon under Persian rule, and this view is confirmed by
other evidence, to which I shall have to ask the reader's
attention a little later on.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Connexion
of Purim
with the
Sacaea. The joyous
nature of
Purim.</note>
If the links which bind Purim to Zakmuk are reasonably
strong, the chain of evidence which connects the Jewish
festival with the Sacaea is much stronger. Nor is this
surprising when we remember that, while the popular mode
of celebrating Zakmuk is unknown, we possess important
and trustworthy details as to the manner of holding the
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
Sacaea. We have seen that the Sacaea was a wild Bacchanalian
revel at which men and women disguised themselves
and drank and played together in a fashion that was
more gay than modest. Now this is, or used to be, precisely
the nature of Purim. The two days of the festival,
according to the author of the book of Esther, were to be
kept for ever as <q>days of feasting and gladness, and of sending
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.</q><note place='foot'>Esther x. 22.</note> And
this joyous character the festival seems always to have
retained. The author of a tract in the Talmud lays it down
as a rule that at the feast of Purim every Jew is bound to
drink until he cannot distinguish between the words <q>Cursed
be Haman</q> and <q>Blessed be Mordecai</q>; and he tells how
on one occasion a certain Rabba drank so deep at Purim
that he murdered a rabbi without knowing what he was
about. Indeed Purim has been described as the Jewish
Bacchanalia, and we are told that at this season everything
is lawful which can contribute to the mirth and
gaiety of the festival.<note place='foot'>J. Buxtorf, <hi rend='italic'>Synagoga Judaica</hi>
(Bâle, 1661), pp. 554 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 559 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Writers of the seventeenth century
assert that during the two days, and especially on the evening
of the second day, the Jews did nothing but feast and
drink to repletion, play, dance, sing, and make merry; in
particular they disguised themselves, men and women exchanging
clothes, and thus attired ran about like mad, in
open defiance of the Mosaic law, which expressly forbids
men to dress as women and women as men.<note place='foot'>J. Buxtorf, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 559; Schickard,
quoted by Lagarde, <q>Purim,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der kön. Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen</hi>,
xxxiv. (1887) pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J.
Chr. G. Bodenschatz, <hi rend='italic'>Kirchliche Verfassung
der heutigen Juden</hi> (Erlangen,
1748), ii. 256. For the rule forbidding
men and women to exchange
garments, see Deuteronomy xxii. 5.</note> Among the
Jews of Frankfort, who inhabited the squalid but quaint and
picturesque old street known as the Judengasse, which many
of us still remember, the revelry at Purim ran as high as
ever in the eighteenth century. The gluttony and intoxication
began punctually at three o'clock in the afternoon of
the first day and went on until the whole community seemed
to have taken leave of their senses. They ate and drank,
they frolicked and cut capers, they reeled and staggered
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
about, they shrieked, yelled, stamped, clattered, and broke
each other's heads with wooden hammers till the blood
flowed. On the evening of the first day the women were
allowed, as a special favour, to open their latticed window
and look into the men's synagogue, because the great
deliverance of the Jews from their enemies in the time of
King Ahasuerus was said to have been effected by a woman.
A feature of the festival which should not be overlooked
was the acting of the story of Esther as a comedy, in which
Esther, Ahasuerus, Haman, Mordecai, and others played
their parts after a fashion that sometimes degenerated from
farce into ribaldry.<note place='foot'>J. J. Schudt, <hi rend='italic'>Jüdische Merkwürdigkeiten</hi>
(Frankfort and Leipsic, 1714),
ii. Theil, pp. 309, 314, 316, iv.
Theiles die ii. Continuation, p. 347;
I. Abrahams, <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Life in the Middle
Ages</hi> (London, 1896), pp. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
I have to thank my learned friend Dr.
S. Schechter for bringing both these
works to my notice.</note> Thus on the whole we may take it
that Purim has always been a Saturnalia, and therefore
corresponds in character to the Sacaea as that festival has
been described for us by Strabo.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The origin
of Purim
according
to the book
of Esther. The
rival pairs
Mordecai
and Esther
on the
one side,
Haman
and Vashti
on the
other.</note>
But further, when we examine the narrative which professes
to account for the institution of Purim, we discover in
it not only the strongest traces of Babylonian origin, but
also certain singular analogies to those very features of the
Sacaean festival with which we are here more immediately
concerned. The book of Esther turns upon the fortunes of
two men, the vizier Haman and the despised Jew Mordecai,
at the court of a Persian king. Mordecai, we are told, had
given mortal offence to the vizier, who accordingly prepares
a tall gallows on which he hopes to see his enemy hanged,
while he himself expects to receive the highest mark of the
king's favour by being allowed to wear the royal crown and
the royal robes, and thus attired to parade the streets
mounted on the king's own horse and attended by one of
the noblest princes, who should proclaim to the multitude
his temporary exaltation and glory. But the artful intrigues
of the wicked vizier miscarried and resulted in precisely the
opposite of what he had hoped and expected; for the royal
honours which he had looked for fell to his rival Mordecai,
and he himself was hanged on the gallows which he had made
ready for his foe. In this story we seem to detect a reminiscence,
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
more or less confused, of the Zoganes of the Sacaea,
in other words, of the custom of investing a private man with
the insignia of royalty for a few days and then putting him
to death on the gallows or the cross. It is true that in the
narrative the part of the Zoganes is divided between two
actors, one of whom hopes to play the king but is hanged
instead, while the other acts the royal part and escapes the
gallows to which he was destined by his enemy. But this
bisection, so to say, of the Zoganes may have been deliberately
invented by the Jewish author of the book of Esther
for the sake of setting the origin of Purim, which it was his
purpose to explain, in a light that should reflect glory on
his own nation. Or, perhaps more probably, it points back
to a custom of appointing two mock kings at the Sacaea,
one of whom was put to death at the end of the festival,
while the other was allowed to go free, at least for a time.
We shall be the more inclined to adopt the latter hypothesis
when we observe that corresponding to the two rival aspirants
to the temporary kingship there appear in the Jewish
narrative two rival queens, Vashti and Esther, one of whom
succeeds to the high estate from which the other has fallen.
Further, it is to be noted that Mordecai, the successful
candidate for the mock kingship, and Esther, the successful
candidate for the queenship, are linked together by close
ties both of interest and blood, the two being said to be
cousins. This suggests that in the original story or the
original custom there may have figured two pairs of kings
and queens, of whom one pair is represented in the Jewish
narrative by Mordecai and Esther and the other by Haman
and Vashti.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analysis of
the names
Mordecai
and Esther,
Haman
and Vashti. Jensen's
theory that
Haman
and Vashti
were
Elamite
deities in
opposition
to the
Babylonian
deities
Mordecai
(Marduk)
and Esther
(Ishtar).</note>
Some confirmation of this view is furnished by the
names of two at least out of the four personages. It seems
to be now generally recognized by Biblical scholars that
the name Mordecai, which has no meaning in Hebrew, is
nothing but a slightly altered form of Marduk or Merodach,
the name of the chief god of Babylon, whose
great festival was the Zakmuk; and further, it is generally
admitted that Esther in like manner is equivalent to
Ishtar, the great Babylonian goddess whom the Greeks
called Astarte, and who is more familiar to English readers
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
as Ashtaroth. The derivation of the names of Haman and
Vashti is less certain, but some high authorities are disposed
to accept the view of Jensen that Haman is identical with
Humman or Homman, the national god of the Elamites,
and that Vashti is in like manner an Elamite goddess whose
name Jensen read as Mashti in inscriptions. Now, when we
consider that the Elamites were from time immemorial the
hereditary foes of the Babylonians and had their capital at
Susa, the very place in which the scene of the book of Esther
is laid, we can hardly deny the plausibility of the theory that
Haman and Vashti on the one side and Mordecai and Esther
on the other represent the antagonism between the gods of
Elam and the gods of Babylon, and the final victory of the
Babylonian deities in the very capital of their rivals.<note place='foot'><p>P. Jensen, <q>Elamitische Eigennamen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde des Morgenlandes</hi>, vi. (1892) pp.
47-70; compare <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> pp. 209-212. All
Jensen's etymologies are accepted by
W. Nowack (<hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der hebräischen
Archäologie</hi>, Freiburg i. Baden
and Leipsic, 1894, ii. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>); H.
Gunkel (<hi rend='italic'>Schöpfung und Chaos</hi>, Göttingen,
1895, pp. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>); D. G. Wildeboer
(in his commentary on Esther, pp.
173 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, forming part of K. Marti's
<hi rend='italic'>Kurzer Hand-Commentar zum alten
Testament</hi>, Freiburg i. B. 1898);
Th. Nöldeke (<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Esther,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Biblica</hi>, vol. ii. coll. 1404 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>);
and H. Zimmern (in E. Schrader's
<hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
Berlin, 1902, pp. 485, 516 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).
On the other hand, Br. Meissner (<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
der deutschen morgenländischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, I. (1896) p. 301) and M.
Jastrow (<hi rend='italic'>The Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria</hi>, p. 686, note 2) suspend
their judgment as to the identification
of Haman and Vashti with Elamite
deities, though they apparently regard
the identification of Mordecai and
Esther with Marduk and Ishtar as
quite certain. The doubt which these
scholars felt as to the derivation of
one at least of these names (Vashti)
is now known to be well founded.
See below, p. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, note 3.
</p>
<p>
It deserves to be noted that on
the twenty-seventh day of the month
Tammuz the heathen of Harran used
to sacrifice nine male lambs to
Haman, <q>the supreme God, the father
of the gods,</q> and they ate and drank
on that day. Chwolsohn suggests a
comparison of the festival with the
Athenian Cronia. See D. Chwolsohn,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1856), ii. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 211
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></p></note> <q>It is
therefore possible,</q> says Professor Nöldeke, <q>that we here have
to do with a feast whereby the Babylonians commemorated
a victory gained by their gods over the gods of their neighbours
the Elamites, against whom they had so often waged
war. The Jewish feast of Purim is an annual merrymaking of
a wholly secular kind, and it is known that there were similar
feasts among the Babylonians. That the Jews in Babylonia
should have adopted a festival of this sort cannot be deemed
improbable, since in modern Germany, to cite an analogous
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
case, many Jews celebrate Christmas after the manner of
their Christian fellow-countrymen, in so far at least as it is
a secular institution. It is true that hitherto no Babylonian
feast coinciding, like Purim, with the full moon of the twelfth
month has been discovered; but our knowledge of the Babylonian
feasts is derived from documents of an earlier period.
Possibly the calendar may have undergone some change by
the time when the Jewish feast of Purim was established.
Or it may be that the Jews intentionally shifted the date of
the festival which they borrowed from the heathen.</q><note place='foot'>Th. Nöldeke, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Esther,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, vol. ii. (London,
1901) coll. 1405. But in a letter,
written to me (20th May 1901) since
the publication of the last edition of
this book, Professor Nöldeke expresses
a doubt whether he has not followed
Jensen's mythological identifications in
the book of Esther too far.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But the
proposed
etymology
of Vashti
is untenable.</note>
However, the theory of an opposition between the gods
of Babylon and the gods of Elam at the festival appears to
break down at a crucial point; for the latest and most
accurate reading of the Elamite inscriptions proves, I am
informed, that the name of the goddess which Jensen read
as Mashti, and which on that assumption he legitimately
compared to the Hebrew Vashti,<note place='foot'><q>The change of <emph>m</emph> to <emph>w</emph> or <emph>v</emph>
(the Hebrew ו = <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>waw</foreign>) is frequent and
certain</q> (the Rev. C. H. W. Johns
in a letter to me, May 19th, 1913).
The change is vouched for also by
my friend Professor A. A. Bevan,
who cites as an instance the name of
the Babylonian king Amel-Marduk,
which in Hebrew is changed into
Evil-Merodach (2 Kings xxv. 27;
Jeremiah lii. 31). See E. Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte
Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1902), p. 396.</note> must really be read as
Parti, between which and Vashti there is no connexion.
Accordingly, in a discussion of the origin of Purim it is
safer at present to lay no weight on the supposed religious
antagonism between the deities of Babylon and Elam.<note place='foot'>The name of the Elamite goddess
is read as Parti by the Rev.
Father Scheil. See E. Cosquin, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Prologue-cadre des Mille et Une Nuits,
les Légendes Perses, et le Livre
d'Esther</hi> (Paris, 1909), p. 68 (extract
from the <hi rend='italic'>Revue Biblique Internationale</hi>,
Janvier et Avril, 1909,
published by the Dominicans of Jerusalem).
The Master of St. Catharine's
College, Cambridge (the Rev. C. H.
W. Johns), has kindly examined the
facsimile of the inscriptions for me.
He informs me that Father Scheil's
reading is correct and that the reading
Mashti is quite wrong. He further
tells me that Jensen was misled by an
incorrect edition of the inscriptions to
which alone he had access. The signs for
<foreign rend='italic'>par</foreign> (or <foreign rend='italic'>bar</foreign>) and <foreign rend='italic'>mash</foreign> in the inscriptions
resemble each other and therefore
might easily be confused by a copyist.
All Jensen's etymologies, except that
of Mordecai, are adversely criticized
by M. Emile Cosquin in the work
to which I have referred (pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).
He prefers with Oppert to derive all
the names except Mordecai (the identity
of which with Marduk he does not dispute)
from the old Persian. However,
these derivations from the Persian are
rejected by Professor Th. Nöldeke,
whose opinion on such a point is
entitled to carry great weight. See
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, ii. (London,
1901) col. 1402, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Esther.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The mock
king of the
Sacaea
seems
to have
personated
a god.
The
view of
Movers.</note>
If we are right in tracing the origin of Purim to
the Babylonian Sacaea and in finding the counterpart
of the Zoganes in Haman and Mordecai, it would appear
that the Zoganes during his five days of office personated
not merely a king but a god, whether that god was the
Babylonian Marduk or some other deity not yet identified.
The union of the divine and royal characters in a single
person is so common that we need not be surprised at meeting
with it in ancient Babylon. And the view that the mock
king of the Sacaea died as a god on the cross or the gallows
is no novelty. The acute and learned Movers long ago
observed that <q>we should be overlooking the religious significance
of oriental festivals and the connexion of the Sacaea
with the worship of Anaitis, if we were to treat as a mere
jest the custom of disguising a slave as a king. We may
take it for certain that with the royal dignity the king of the
Sacaea assumed also the character of an oriental ruler as
representative of the divinity, and that when he took
his pleasure among the women of the king's harem, he
played the part of Sandan or Sardanapalus himself. For
according to ancient oriental ideas the use of the king's
concubines constituted a claim to the throne, and we know
from Dio that the five-days' king received full power over
the harem. Perhaps he began his reign by publicly cohabiting
with the king's concubines, just as Absalom went in to
his father's concubines in a tent spread on the roof of the
palace before all Israel, for the purpose of thereby making
known and strengthening his claim to the throne.</q><note place='foot'>F. C. Movers, <hi rend='italic'>Die Phoenizier</hi>, i.
(Bonn, 1841) pp. 490 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; 2 Samuel
xvi. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, compare xii. 8. It was a
well-attested custom of the Assyrian
kings, when they had conquered a
city, to take into their harem the
daughters of the vanquished princes
and rulers. See C. F. Lehmann
(-Haupt), <hi rend='italic'>Šamaššumutkîn König von
Babylonien</hi> (Leipsic, 1892), p. 31.
The Persian and Scythian kings seem
also to have married the wives of
their predecessors. See Herodotus,
iii. 68 and 88, iv. 78; K. Neumann,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Hellenen im Skythenlande</hi>, i. (Berlin,
1855) p. 301. Such a custom
points to an old system of mother-kin
under which the royal dignity was
transmitted through women. See <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>,
ii. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The mock
king of
the Sacaea
may have
mated with
a woman
who played
the part
of a
goddess,
whether
Anaitis,
Astarte, or
Semiramis.
Identity
of the
mythical
Semiramis
with
Astarte. The
lovers of
Semiramis
and Ishtar
(Astarte).</note>
Whatever may be thought of this latter conjecture, there
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
can be no doubt that Movers is right in laying great stress
both on the permission given to the mock king to invade the
real king's harem, and on the intimate connexion of the Sacaea
with the worship of Anaitis. That connexion is vouched for
by Strabo, and when we consider that in Strabo's time the
cult of the old Persian goddess Anaitis was thoroughly
saturated with Babylonian elements and had practically
merged in the sensual worship of the Babylonian Ishtar or
Astarte,<note place='foot'>Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Anaitis,</q> in W.
H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und
röm. Mythologie</hi>, i. (Leipsic, 1884-1890)
coll. 352 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> At the temple
of Anaitis in Acilisena, a city of
Armenia, the daughters of the noblest
families regularly prostituted themselves
for a long time before marriage
(Strabo, xi. 14. 16, p. 532). Agathias
identified Anaitis with Aphrodite (<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi>
ii. 24), and when the Greeks spoke of
the Oriental Aphrodite, they meant
Astarte or one of her equivalents.
Jensen proposes to identify Anaitis with
an Elamite goddess Nahuntí, whom he
takes to have been equivalent to Ishtar
or Astarte, especially in her quality of
the Evening Star. See his article,
<q>Elamitische Eigennamen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Wiener
Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes</hi>,
vi. (1892) pp. 64-67, 70.</note> we shall incline to view with favour Movers's further
conjecture, that a female slave may have been appointed
to play the divine queen to the part of the divine king
supported by the Zoganes, and that reminiscences of such a
queen have survived in the myth or legend of Semiramis.
According to tradition, Semiramis was a fair courtesan beloved
by the king of Assyria, who took her to wife. She
won the king's heart so far that she persuaded him to yield
up to her the kingdom for five days, and having assumed
the sceptre and the royal robes she made a great banquet on
the first day, but on the second day she shut up her husband
in prison or put him to death and thenceforward reigned
alone.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, ii. 20; Aelian,
<hi rend='italic'>Var. Hist.</hi> vii. 1.</note> Taken with Strabo's evidence as to the association
of the Sacaea with the worship of Anaitis, this tradition
seems clearly to point to a custom of giving the Zoganes,
during his five days' reign, a queen who represented the
goddess Anaitis or Semiramis or Astarte, in short the great
Asiatic goddess of love and fertility, by whatever name she
was called. For that in Eastern legend Semiramis was a
real queen of Assyria, who had absorbed many of the attributes
of the goddess Astarte, appears to be established by the
researches of modern scholars; in particular it has been shewn
by Robertson Smith that the worship of Anaitis is not only
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
modelled on Astarte worship in general, but corresponds to
that particular type of it which was specially associated with
the name of Semiramis.<note place='foot'>W. Robertson Smith, <q>Ctesias
and the Semiramis Legend,</q> <hi rend='italic'>English
Historical Review</hi>, ii. (1887) pp. 303-317.
Amongst other evidence, Smith
refers to Diodorus Siculus, from whose
account (ii. 4) of the birth of Semiramis
he infers that she <q>is the daughter of
Derceto, the fish goddess of Ascalon,
and is herself the Astarte whose sacred
doves were honoured at Ascalon and
throughout Syria.</q> It seems probable
that the legendary Semiramis is to
be identified with Shammuramat, the
<q>palace wife</q> of Samsi-Adad, king
of Assyria, and mother of King Adad-Nirari;
she lived towards the end of
the ninth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, and is known
to us from Assyrian inscriptions. See
C. F. Lehmann-Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Die historische
Semiramis und ihre Zeit</hi> (Tübingen,
1910), pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Semiramis,</q>
in W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon der
griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>, iv. coll.
678 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The identity of Anaitis and the
mythical Semiramis is clearly proved by the circumstance
that the great sanctuary of Anaitis at Zela in Pontus was
actually built upon a mound of Semiramis;<note place='foot'>Strabo, xii. 3. 37, p. 559, compare
xi. 8. 4, p. 512. Zela is the
modern Zileh, a town of about 20,000
inhabitants clustered at the foot of the
so-called mound of Semiramis, which
is an inconsiderable protuberance of
natural rock crowned by the walls of
an old citadel. The place is singularly
destitute of ancient remains, but every
year in the first fortnight of December
a fair is held in the town, to which
merchants come not only from the
whole of Asia Minor, but also from the
Caucasus, Armenia, and Persia. This
fair may very well be a direct descendant
of a great festival held in honour
of Anaitis or Astarte. See G. Perrot
et Ch. Chipiez, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Art dans
l'Antiquité</hi>, iv. (Paris, 1887) p. 649;
F. Cumont et E. Cumont, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'Exploration archéologique dans le
Pont et la Petite Arménie</hi> (Brussels,
1906), pp. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> probably the
old worship of the Semitic goddess always continued there
even after her Semitic name of Semiramis or Astarte had
been exchanged for the Persian name of Anaitis, perhaps
in obedience to a decree of the Persian king Artaxerxes II.,
who first spread the worship of Anaitis in the west of Asia.<note place='foot'>Berosus, cited by Clement of
Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> v. 65, p. 57 ed.
Potter (where for Ταναΐδος we should
read Ἀναΐτιδος, as is done by C. Müller,
<hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</hi>,
ii. 509).</note>
It is highly significant, not only that the Sacaean festival
was annually held at this ancient seat of the worship of
Semiramis or Astarte; but further, that the whole city of
Zela was formerly inhabited by sacred slaves and harlots,
ruled over by a supreme pontiff, who administered it as a
sanctuary rather than as a city.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xi. 8. 4, p. 512, xii. 3. 37,
p. 559. The nature of the ἱερόδουλοι
at Zela is indicated by Strabo in a
passage (xii. 3. 36) where he describes
a similar state of things at Comana, a
city not far from Zela. His words are
πλῆθος γυναικῶν τῶν ἐργαζομένων ἀπὸ
τοῦ σώματος, ὦν αἰ πλείους εἰσὶν ἰεραί.</note> Formerly, we may suppose,
this priestly king himself died a violent death at the Sacaea
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
in the character of the divine lover of Semiramis, while the
part of the goddess was played by one of the sacred prostitutes.
The probability of this is greatly strengthened by
the existence of the so-called mound of Semiramis under the
sanctuary. For the mounds of Semiramis, which were
pointed out all over Western Asia,<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 184; Strabo, xvi.
i. 2, p. 737; Diodorus Siculus, ii.
14.</note> were said to have been
the graves of her lovers whom she buried alive.<note place='foot'>Ctesias, cited by John of Antioch,
in C. Müller's <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Historicorum
Graecorum</hi>, iv. 539.</note> The
tradition ran that the great and lustful queen Semiramis,
fearing to contract a lawful marriage lest her husband should
deprive her of power, admitted to her bed the handsomest of
her soldiers, only, however, to destroy them all afterwards.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, ii. 13. Note
that the first husband of Semiramis is
said to have hanged himself (Diodorus
Siculus, ii. 6).</note>
Now this tradition is one of the surest indications of the
identity of the mythical Semiramis with the Babylonian
goddess Ishtar or Astarte. For the famous Babylonian epic
which recounts the deeds of the hero Gilgamesh tells how,
when he clothed himself in royal robes and put his crown on
his head, the goddess Ishtar was smitten with love of him
and wooed him to be her mate. But Gilgamesh rejected her
insidious advances, for he knew the sad fate that had overtaken
all her lovers, and he reproached the cruel goddess,
saying:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Tammuz, the lover of thy youth,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou causest to weep every year.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The bright-coloured</hi> allallu <hi rend='italic'>bird thou didst love</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou didst crush him and break his pinions.</hi></l>
<l><q rend='none'><hi rend='italic'>In the woods he stands and laments, <q>O my pinions!</q></hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou didst love the lion of perfect strength,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Seven and seven times thou didst dig pit-falls for him.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou didst love the horse that joyed in the fray,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>With whip and spur and lash thou didst urge him on.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou didst force him on for seven double hours,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou didst force him on when wearied and thirsty;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>His mother the goddess Silili thou madest weep.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thou didst also love a shepherd of the flock,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Who continually poured out for thee the libation,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And daily slaughtered kids for thee;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>But thou didst smite him, and didst change him into a wolf,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>So that his own sheep-boys hunted him,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>And his own hounds tore him to pieces.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
sacred
harlots
of Ishtar.</note>
The hero also tells the miserable end of a gardener in
the service of the goddess's father. The hapless swain had
once been honoured with the love of the goddess, but when
she tired of him she changed him into a cripple so that he
could not rise from his bed. Therefore Gilgamesh fears to
share the fate of all her former lovers and spurns her
proffered favours.<note place='foot'>A. Jeremias, <hi rend='italic'>Izdubar-Nimrod</hi>,
(Leipsic, 1891), pp. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M.
Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria</hi> (Boston, U.S.A., 1898),
p. 482; L. W. King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion
and Mythology</hi> (London, 1899),
pp. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P. Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrisch-Babylonische
Mythen und Epen</hi> (Berlin,
1900), pp. 169, 171; R. F. Harper,
<hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</hi>
(New York, 1901), pp. 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Das
Gilgamesch-Epos, neu übersetzt von</hi>
Arthur Ungnad <hi rend='italic'>und gemeinverständlich
erklärt von</hi> Hugo Gressmann (Göttingen,
1911), pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The true name
of the Babylonian hero, which used to
be read as Izdubar, has been found to
be Gilgamesh. See M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> pp. 468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Zimmern, in E.
Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das
Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1902), p. 566
note 4; A. Ungnad, <hi rend='italic'>Das Gilgamesch-Epos</hi>,
pp. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Aelian mentions (<hi rend='italic'>De
natura animalium</hi>, xii. 21) a Babylonian
king, Gilgamus, whose name is
doubtless identical with that of the
hero.</note> But it is not merely that the myth of
Ishtar thus tallies with the legend of Semiramis; the worship
of the goddess was marked by a profligacy which has found
its echo in the loose character ascribed by tradition to the
queen. Inscriptions, which confirm and supplement the
evidence of Herodotus, inform us that Ishtar was served by
harlots of three different classes all dedicated to her worship.
Indeed, there is reason to think that these women personated
the goddess herself, since one of the names given to them is
applied also to her.<note place='foot'>A. Jeremias, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 475 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 484
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Herodotus, i. 199. The name
which Herodotus gives to the goddess
is Mylitta, but this is only a corruption
of one of her Semitic titles, whether
Baalath (Hebrew בעלת) <q>mistress,</q> or
perhaps rather <foreign rend='italic'>Mullittu</foreign>, from <foreign rend='italic'>Mu'allidtu</foreign>
(Hebrew מילדת), <q>she who helps
to the birth.</q> See E. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Astarte,</q> in W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon
der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>, i. 648;
H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die
Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1902), p. 423 note 7.
The female <q>votaries of Marduk</q> are
repeatedly mentioned in the code of
Hammurabi. See C. H. W. Johns,
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts,
and Letters</hi> (Edinburgh, 1904),
pp. 54, 55, 59, 60, 61; <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis,
Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, p. 63.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The myth
of Ishtar
(Astarte)
and her
lovers acted
at the
Sacaea in
Zela.</note>
Thus we can hardly doubt that the mythical Semiramis
is substantially a form of Ishtar or Astarte, the great Semitic
goddess of love and fertility; and if this is so, we may
assume with at least a fair degree of probability that the
high pontiff of Zela or his deputy, who played the king of
the Sacaea at the sanctuary of Semiramis, perished as one
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
of the unhappy lovers of the goddess, perhaps as Tammuz,
whom she caused <q>to weep every year.</q> When he had run
his brief meteoric career of pleasure and glory, his bones
would be laid in the great mound which covered the mouldering
remains of many mortal gods, his predecessors, whom the
goddess had honoured with her fatal love.<note place='foot'>Along with Anaitis at Zela there
were worshipped two deities named
Omanos and Anadates; Strabo says
that they were Persian divinities, and
certainly their ritual as described by him
was purely Persian. See Strabo, xi.
8. 4, p. 512, xv. 3. 15, p. 733;
Franz Cumont, <hi rend='italic'>Les Religions orientales
dans le Paganisme romain</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Paris,
1909), pp. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It has been proposed
to identify their names, first,
with those of the two Persian archangels
(Amshaspands), Vohumano or
Vohu Manah (<q>Good Thought</q>) and
Ameretât (<q>Immortality</q>), and, second,
with those of Haman and his father
Hammedatha in the book of Esther
(iii. 1). In order to support the identification
of Anadates with Ameretât
and Hammedatha it has been further
proposed to alter Anadates into Amadates
or Amardates in the text of
Strabo, which would assimilate the
name to Amurdâd, a late form of
Ameretât. See P. Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Hittiter
und Armenier</hi> (Strasburg, 1898), p.
181; Franz Cumont, <hi rend='italic'>Textes et Monuments
figurés relatifs aux Mystères de
Mithra</hi>, i. (Brussels, 1899) pp. 130,
131; H. Winckler, <hi rend='italic'>Altorientalische
Forschungen</hi>, Dritte Reihe, i. (Leipsic,
1901) p. 4; H. Zimmern, in E.
Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das
Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1902), p. 516
note 3; P. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Purim</hi> (Leipsic,
1906), p. 26; L. B. Paton, <hi rend='italic'>Critical and
Exegetical Commentary on the Book of
Esther</hi> (Edinburgh, 1908), pp. 88, 92.
As to the Persian archangels (Amshaspands)
see C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der
Religion im Altertum</hi> (Gotha, 1896-1903),
ii. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. H. Gray,
<q>The Double Nature of the Iranian
Archangels,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
vii. (1904) pp. 345 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J.
H. Moulton, <hi rend='italic'>Early Religious Poetry of
Persia</hi> (Cambridge, 1911), pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
But apart from the philological difficulty
created by the forcible alteration
of Strabo's text in order to bring it
into conformity with the theory, it is
difficult to see how the highly abstract
conceptions of the archangels <q>Good
Thought</q> and <q>Immortality</q> could
have passed into the highly concrete
and by no means angelic figures of
Haman and Hammedatha. This latter
difficulty has been pointed out to me
in a letter (8th June, 1901) by my friend
the Rev. Professor J. H. Moulton,
who further informs me that in Persian
religion Vohu Manah is never linked
with Ameretât, whereas Ameretât is
constantly linked with another archangel
Haurvatât (<q>Health</q>). Professor
Theodor Nöldeke in a letter to
me (20th May, 1901) also expresses
himself sceptical as to the proposed
identifications; he tells me that the
name of a Persian god cannot end in
<foreign rend='italic'>data</foreign>, just as the name of a Greek god
cannot end in -δωρος or -δοτος. On the
whole it seems better to leave Omanos
and Anadates out of the present discussion.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Such
sacred
dramas
are magical
rites intended
to
influence
the course
of nature.</note>
Here then at the great sanctuary of the goddess in Zela
it appears that her myth was regularly translated into action;
the story of her love and the death of her divine lover was
performed year by year as a sort of mystery-play by men
and women who lived for a season and sometimes died in
the character of the visionary beings whom they personated.
The intention of these sacred dramas, we may be sure, was
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
neither to amuse nor to instruct an idle audience, and as
little were they designed to gratify the actors, to whose baser
passions they gave the reins for a time. They were solemn
rites which mimicked the doings of divine beings, because
man fancied that by such mimicry he was able to arrogate
to himself the divine functions and to exercise them for
the good of his fellows. The operations of nature, to his
thinking, were carried on by mythical personages very like
himself; and if he could only assimilate himself to them
completely he would be able to wield all their powers.
This is probably the original motive of most religious dramas
or mysteries among rude peoples. The dramas are played,
the mysteries are performed, not to teach the spectators the
doctrines of their creed, still less to entertain them, but for
the purpose of bringing about those natural effects which
they represent in mythical disguise; in a word, they are
magical ceremonies and their mode of operation is mimicry
or sympathy. We shall probably not err in assuming that
many myths, which we now know only as myths, had once
their counterpart in magic; in other words, that they used
to be acted as a means of producing in fact the events
which they describe in figurative language. Ceremonies
often die out while myths survive, and thus we are left to
infer the dead ceremony from the living myth. If myths
are, in a sense, the reflections or shadows of men cast upon
the clouds, we may say that these reflections continue to be
visible in the sky and to inform us of the doings of the men
who cast them, long after the men themselves are not only
beyond our range of vision but sunk beneath the horizon.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
intention
of sacred
dramas and
masked
dances
among
savages.</note>
The principle of mimicry is implanted so deep in human
nature and has exerted so far-reaching an influence on the
development of religion as well as of the arts that it may
be well, even at the cost of a short digression, to illustrate
by example some of the modes in which primitive man has
attempted to apply it to the satisfaction of his wants by
means of religious or magical dramas. For it seems probable
that the masked dances and ceremonies, which have played
a great part in the social life of savages in many quarters of
the world, were primarily designed to subserve practical
purposes rather than simply to stir the emotions of the
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
spectators and to while away the languor and tedium of
idle hours. The actors sought to draw down blessings on
the community by mimicking certain powerful superhuman
beings and in their assumed character working those beneficent
miracles which in the capacity of mere men they would
have confessed themselves powerless to effect. In fact the
aim of these elementary dramas, which contain in germ the
tragedy and comedy of civilized nations, was the acquisition
of superhuman power for the public good. That this is the
real intention of at least many of these dramatic performances
will appear from the following accounts, which for
the sake of accuracy I will quote for the most part in the
words of the original observers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Masked
dances
among
the Indians
of North-West
America.</note>
A conspicuous feature in the social life of the Indian
tribes of North-Western America are the elaborate masked
dances or pantomimes in which the actors personate spirits
or legendary animals. Most of them appear designed to
bring before the eyes of the people the guardian spirits of
the clans. <q>Owing to the fact that these spirits are
hereditary, their gifts are always contained in the legend
detailing their acquisition by the ancestor of a clan. The
principal gifts in these tales are the magic harpoon which
insures success in sea-otter hunting; the death bringer
which, when pointed against enemies, kills them; the water
of life which resuscitates the dead; the burning fire which,
when pointed against an object, burns it; and a dance, a
song, and cries which are peculiar to the spirit. The gift of
this dance means that the protégé of the spirit is to perform
the same dances which have been shown to him. In these
dances he personates the spirit. He wears his mask and his
ornaments. Thus the dance must be considered a dramatic
performance of the myth relating to the acquisition of the
spirit, and shows to the people that the performer by his
visit to the spirit has obtained his powers and desires.
When nowadays a spirit appears to a young Indian, he
gives him the same dance, and the youth also returns
from the initiation filled with the powers and desires
of the spirit. He authenticates his initiation by his
dance in the same way as his mythical ancestor did.
The obtaining of the magical gifts from these spirits is
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
called <foreign rend='italic'>lokoala</foreign>, while the person who has obtained them
becomes <foreign rend='italic'>naualaku</foreign>, supernatural, which is also the quality of
the spirit himself. The ornaments of all these spirits are
described as made of cedar bark, which is dyed red in the
juice of alder bark. They appear to their devotees only in
winter, and therefore the dances are also performed only in
winter.</q><note place='foot'>Franz Boas, <q>The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the
United States National Museum for
1895</hi> (Washington, 1897), p. 396.</note> In some of the dances the performers imitate
animals, and the explanation which the Indians give of
these dances is that <q>the ceremonial was instituted at the
time when men had still the form of animals; before the
transformer had put everything into its present shape. The
present ceremonial is a repetition of the ceremonial performed
by the man animals or, as we may say, a dramatization of
the myth. Therefore the people who do not represent
spirits, represent these animals.</q><note place='foot'>Franz Boas, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 420 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The description applies specially to
the masked dances of the Kwakiutl
tribe, but probably it holds good for
the similar dances of the other Indian
tribes on the same coast. Thus among
the Bella Coola Indians <q>the masks
used in the dances represent mythical
personages, and the dances are pantomimic
representations of myths. Among
others, the thunder bird and his servant
... appear in the dances</q> (F. Boas,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 651).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These
masked
dances
represent
mythical
incidents
and are
supposed
to have
been
revealed
to the
Indians
by their
guardian
spirits.</note>
Another observer of these Indians writes on the same
subject as follows: <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>dukwally</foreign> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <foreign rend='italic'>lokoala</foreign>) and other
<foreign rend='italic'>tamanawas</foreign><note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Tamanawas</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tamanous</foreign> is a
Chinook term signifying <q>guardian
spirits.</q> See <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
iii. 405 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> performances are exhibitions intended to represent
incidents connected with their mythological legends.
There are a great variety, and they seem to take the place,
in a measure, of theatrical performances or games during
the season of the religious festivals. There are no persons
especially set apart as priests for the performance of these
ceremonies, although some, who seem more expert than
others, are usually hired to give life to the scenes, but these
performers are quite as often found among the slaves or
common people as among the chiefs, and excepting during
the continuance of the festivities are not looked on as of any
particular importance. On inquiring the origin of these
ceremonies, I was informed that they did not originate with
the Indians, but were revelations of the guardian spirits, who
made known what they wished to be performed. An Indian,
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
for instance, who has been consulting with his guardian
spirit, which is done by going through the washing and
fasting process before described, will imagine or think he is
called upon to represent the owl. He arranges in his mind
the style of dress, the number of performers, the songs and
dances or other movements, and, having the plan perfected,
announces at a <foreign rend='italic'>tamanawas</foreign> meeting that he has had a revelation
which he will impart to a select few. These are then
taught and drilled in strict secrecy, and when they have
perfected themselves, will suddenly make their appearance
and perform before the astonished tribe. Another Indian
gets up the representation of the whale, others do the same
of birds, and in fact of everything that they can think of.
If any performance is a success, it is repeated, and gradually
comes to be looked upon as one of the regular order in the
ceremonies; if it does not satisfy the audience, it is laid
aside. Thus they have performances that have been handed
down from remote ages, while others are of a more recent
date.</q><note place='foot'>James G. Swan, <hi rend='italic'>The Indians of Cape Flattery</hi>, p. 66, quoted by Franz
Boas, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 637 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Gods or
spirits
personated
by the
actors in
the masked
dances.</note>
Another writer, who travelled among the Indians of
North-Western America, has expressed himself on this
subject as follows: <q rend='pre'>The task of representing the gods is
undertaken in every tribe by some intelligent and, according
to their own account, inspired men; they form the Secret
Societies, in order that their secret arts and doctrines, their
mummeries and masquerades may not be revealed to the
uninitiated and to the public. The intention of these exhibitions
is to confirm the faith of the young people and the
women in the ancient traditions as to the intercourse of the
gods with men and as to their own intimate relations to the
gods. In order to convince possible doubters, the members
of the Secret Societies have had recourse to all kinds of
mysterious means, which to a civilized man must appear the
height of savagery; for example, they mutilate their bodies,
rend corpses in pieces and devour them, tear pieces out of
the bodies of living men, and so on. Further, the almost
morbid vanity of the North-Western Indians and their
desire to win fame, respect, and distinction may have served
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
as a motive for joining the Secret Societies; since every
member of them enjoys great respect.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There were and still are hundreds of masks in use,
every one of which represents a spirit who occurs in their
legends. In the exhibitions they appear singly or in groups,
according as the legend to be represented requires, and the
masked men are then looked upon by the astonished crowd,
not only as actors representing the gods, but as the very
gods themselves who have come down from heaven to earth.
Hence every such representative must do exactly what
legend says the spirit did. If the representative wears no
mask, as often happens with the <foreign rend='italic'>Hametzes</foreign> (the Cannibals or
Biters) or the <foreign rend='italic'>Pakwalla</foreign> (Medicine-men), then the spirit
whom he represents has passed into his body, and accordingly
the man possessed by the spirit is not responsible for
what he does amiss in this condition. As the use of masks
throws a sort of mysterious glamour over the performance
and at the same time allows the actor to remain unknown,
the peculiarly sacred festivals are much oftener celebrated
with masks than without them. In every Secret Society
there are definite rules as to how often and how long a mask
may be used. Amongst the Kwakiutl the masks may not,
under the heaviest penalties, be disposed of for four winters,
the season when such festivals are usually celebrated. After
that time they may be destroyed or hidden in the forest,
that no uninitiated person may find them, or they may be
finally sold. The masks are made only in secret, generally
in the deep solitude of the woods, in order that no uninitiated
person may detect the maker at work....</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
dances accompanied
by songs.</note>
<q>The dance is accompanied by a song which celebrates
in boastful words the power of the gods and the mighty
deeds represented in the performance. At the main part of
the performance all present join in the song, for it is generally
known to everybody and is repeated in recitative again and
again. It seems that new songs and new performances are
constantly springing up in one or other of the villages
through the agency of some intelligent young man, hitherto
without a song of his own, who treats in a poetical fashion
some legend which has been handed down orally from their
forefathers. For every man who takes part in the performances
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
and festivals must make his <foreign rend='italic'>début</foreign> with a song composed
by himself. In this way new songs and dances are constantly
originating, the material for them being, of course, always
taken from the tribal deities of the particular singer and
poet.</q><note place='foot'>J. Adrian Jacobsen, <q>Geheimbünde
der Küstenbewohner Nordwest-America's,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie
und Urgeschichte</hi> (1891), pp. 384
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The passage has been already
quoted by me in <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
iii. 500-502.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Spirits
personated
by masked
performers
among the
Esquimaux
of Bering
Strait.</note>
Similar masquerades are in vogue among the neighbours
of these Indians, the Esquimaux of Bering Strait, and from
the following account it will appear that the performances
are based on similar ideas and beliefs. <q rend='pre'>Shamans make
masks representing grotesque faces of supernatural beings
which they claim to have seen. These may be <foreign rend='italic'>yu-ă</foreign>, which
are the spirits of the elements, of places, and of inanimate
things in general; the <foreign rend='italic'>tunghät</foreign>, or wandering genii, or the
shades of people and animals. The first-named are seen in
lonely places, on the plains and mountains or at sea, and
more rarely about the villages, by the clairvoyant vision of
the shamans. They are usually invisible to common eyes,
but sometimes render themselves visible to the people for
various purposes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Many of them, especially among the <foreign rend='italic'>tunghät</foreign>, are of
evil character, bringing sickness and misfortune upon people
from mere wantonness or for some fancied injury. The
Eskimo believe that everything, animate or inanimate, is
possessed of a shade, having semihuman form and features,
enjoying more or less freedom of motion; the shamans give
form to their ideas of them in masks, as well as of others
which they claim inhabit the moon and the sky-land. In
their daily life, if the people witness some strange occurrence,
are curiously affected, or have a remarkable adventure,
during which they seem to be influenced or aided in a
supernatural manner, the shamans interpret the meaning and
describe the appearance of the being that exerted its power.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
animal
masks
worn by
the actors.</note>
<q rend='pre'>Curious mythological beasts are also said to inhabit
both land and sea, but to become visible only on special
occasions. These ideas furnish material upon which their
fancy works, conjuring up strange forms that are usually
modifications of known creatures. It is also believed that
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
in early days all animate beings had a dual existence,
becoming at will either like man or the animal forms they
now wear. In those early days there were but few people;
if an animal wished to assume its human form, the forearm,
wing, or other limb was raised and pushed up the muzzle or
beak as if it were a mask, and the creature became manlike in
form and features. This idea is still held, and it is believed
that many animals now possess this power. The manlike
form thus appearing is called the <foreign rend='italic'>inua</foreign>, and is supposed to
represent the thinking part of the creature, and at death
becomes its shade. Shamans are believed to have the
power of seeing through the animal mask to the manlike
features behind. The ideas held on this subject are well
illustrated in the Raven legends, where the changes are
made repeatedly from one form to another.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Identification
of the
masked
actor
with the
mythical
being
whom he
represents.</note>
<q rend='pre'>Masks may also represent totemic animals, and the
wearers during the festivals are believed actually to become
the creature represented or at least to be endowed with its
spiritual essence. Some of the masks of the lower Yukon
and the adjacent territory to the Kuskokwim are made with
double faces. This is done by having the muzzle of the
animal fitted over and concealing the face of the <foreign rend='italic'>inua</foreign> below,
the outer mask being held in place by pegs so arranged that
it can be removed quickly at a certain time in the ceremony,
thus symbolizing the transformation. Another style of mask
from the lower Kuskokwim has the under face concealed by
a small hinged door on each side, which opens out at the
proper time in a ceremony, indicating the metamorphosis.
When the mask represents a totemic animal, the wearer
needs no double face, since he represents in person the
shade of the totemic animal.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When worn in any ceremonial, either as a totem mask
or as representing the shade, <foreign rend='italic'>yu-ă</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tunghâk</foreign>, the wearer is
believed to become mysteriously and unconsciously imbued
with the spirit of the being which his mask represents, just
as the namesakes are entered into and possessed by the
shades at certain parts of the Festival to the Dead....</q><note place='foot'>As to the belief of these Esquimaux
that at the Festival of the Dead the
spirits of the departed enter into and
animate their human namesakes, see
<hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>,
p. 371.</note>
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
<q>Mask festivals are usually held as a species of thanksgiving
to the shades and powers of earth, air, and water for
giving the hunter success. The <foreign rend='italic'>inuas</foreign> or shades of the
powers and creatures of the earth are represented that they
may be propitiated, thus insuring further success.</q><note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo about
Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington, 1899)
pp. 394 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dramatic
ceremonies
of the Cora
Indians
of Mexico
in which
the actors
personate
gods.
Masked
dances
of the
Brazilian
Indians
to ensure
fertility and
abundance.</note>
The religious ritual of the Cora Indians of Mexico
comprises elaborate dramatic ceremonies or dances, in
which the actors or dancers identify themselves with the
gods, such as the god of the Morning Star, the goddess of
the Moon, and the divinities of the Rain. These dances
form the principal part of the Cora festivals and are accompanied
by liturgical songs, the words of which the
Indians believe to have been revealed to their forefathers
by the gods and to exercise a direct magical influence
upon the deities themselves and through them upon nature.<note place='foot'>K. Th. Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Die Nayarit Expedition</hi>,
I. <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der Cora
Indianer</hi> (Leipsic, 1912), pp. xcii.
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, xcv. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The Kobeua and Kaua Indians of North-Western Brazil
perform masked dances at their festivals in honour of the
dead. The maskers imitate the actions and the habits of
birds, beasts, and insects. For example, there is a large
azure-blue butterfly which delights the eye with the
splendour of its colour, like a fallen fragment of the sky;
and in the butterfly dance two men represent the play of
these brilliant insects in the sunshine, fluttering on the
wing and settling on sandbanks and rocks. Again, the
sloth is acted by a masker who holds on to a cross-beam
of the house by means of a hooked stick, in imitation of the
sluggish creature which will hang by its claws from the bough
of a tree for hours together without stirring. Again, the
darting of swallows, as they flit to and fro across a river,
is mimicked by masked men dancing side by side: the
swarming of sandflies in the air is acted by a swarm of
maskers; and so with the movements of the black vulture,
the owl, the jaguar, the <foreign rend='italic'>aracu</foreign> fish, the house-spider, and the
dung-beetle. Yet these representations are not simple
dramas designed to amuse and divert the mourners in their
hour of sorrow; the Indian attributes to them a much deeper
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
significance, for under the outer husk of beasts and birds and
insects he believes that there lurk foul fiends and powerful
spirits. <q>All these mimicries are based on an idea of magical
efficiency. They are intended to bring blessing and fertility
to the village and its inhabitants, to the plantations, and to
the whole of surrounding nature, thereby compensating, as it
were, for the loss of the dead man in whose honour the
festival is held. By copying as faithfully as possible the
movements and actions of the being whom he personates,
the actor identifies himself with him. The mysterious force
which resides in the mask passes into the dancer, turns the
man himself into a mighty demon, and endows him with the
power of banning demons or earning their favour. Especially
is it the intention by means of mimicry to obtain for man
control over the demons of growth and the spirits of game
and fish.</q> When the festival is over, the masks are burned,
and the demons, which are thought to have animated them,
take flight to their own place, it may be to the other world
or to a mountain top, or to the side of a thundering cascade.<note place='foot'>Th. Koch-Grünberg, <hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre
unter den Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910),
i. 130-140, ii. 169-201. The
passage translated in the text occurs in
vol. ii. p. 196.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Masked
dances
of the
Monumbo
in German
New
Guinea.
Masked
dances
of the
Kayans
of Borneo.</note>
The Monumbo of German New Guinea perform masked
dances in which the dancers personate supernatural beings
or animals, such as kangaroos, dogs, and cassowaries. They
consecrate the masks by fumigating them with the smoke of
a certain creeper, and believe that by doing so they put life
into them. Accordingly they afterwards treat the masks with
respect, talk to them as if they were alive, and refuse to
part with them to Europeans. Certain of the masks they
even regard as guardian spirits and appeal to them for fine
weather, help in the chase or in war, and so forth. Every
clan owns some masks and the head man of the clan makes
all the arrangements for a masquerade. The dances are
accompanied by songs of which the words are unintelligible
even to the natives themselves.<note place='foot'>F. Vormann, <q>Tänze und Tanzfestlichkeiten
der Monumbo-Papua
(Deutsch-Neuguinea),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, vi.
(1911) pp. 415 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 418 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 426
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the Kayans of
Central Borneo perform masked dances for the purpose of
ensuring abundant crops of rice. The actors personate
demons, wearing grotesque masks on their faces, their bodies
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
swathed in cumbrous masses of green leaves. <q>In accordance
with their belief that the spirits are more powerful than
men, the Kayans assume that when they imitate the form of
spirits and play their part, they acquire superhuman power.
Hence just as their spirits can fetch back the souls of men,
so they imagine that they can lure to themselves the souls
of the rice.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 324.
As to these masquerades of the Kayans
see <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>,
i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dramatic
performances
of the
Sea Dyaks
of Borneo,
in which
the actor
personates
a god.</note>
When the Sea Dyaks of Borneo have taken a human
head, they hold a Head-feast (<foreign rend='italic'>Gawè Pala</foreign>) in honour
of the war-god or bird-chief Singalang Burong, who lives
far away above the sky. At this festival a long liturgy
called <foreign rend='italic'>mengap</foreign> is chanted, the god is invoked, and is believed
to be present in the person of an actor, who poses as the
deity and blesses the people in his name. <q>But the invocation
is not made by the human performer in the manner of
a prayer direct to this great being; it takes the form of a
story, setting forth how the mythical hero Kling or Klieng
made a head-feast and fetched Singalang Burong to it.
This Kling, about whom there are many fables, is a spirit,
and is supposed to live somewhere or other not far from
mankind, and to be able to confer benefits upon them.
The Dyak performer or performers then, as they walk up
and down the long verandah of the house singing the
<foreign rend='italic'>mengap</foreign>, in reality describe Kling's <foreign rend='italic'>Gawè Pala</foreign> [head-feast],
and how Singalang Burong was invited and came. In
thought the Dyaks identify themselves with Kling, and the
resultant signification is that the recitation of this story is
an invocation to Singalang Burong, who is supposed to
come not to Kling's house only, but to the actual Dyak
house where the feast is celebrated; and he is received by a
particular ceremony, and is offered food or sacrifice.</q> At
the close of the ceremony <q>the performer goes along the
house, beginning with the head man, touches each person
in it, and pronounces an invocation upon him. In this he
is supposed to personate Singalang Burong and his sons-in-law,
who are believed to be the real actors. Singalang
Burong himself <foreign rend='italic'>nenjangs</foreign> the headmen, and his sons-in-law,
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
the birds, bless the rest. The touch of the human performer,
and the accompanying invocation are thought to effect a
communication between these bird-spirits from the skies and
each individual being. The great bird-chief and his dependants
come from above to give men their charms and their
blessings. Upon the men the performer invokes physical
strength and bravery in war; and upon the women luck
with paddy, cleverness in Dyak feminine accomplishments,
and beauty in form and complexion.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Perham, <q>Mengap, the
Song of the Dyak Sea Feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Straits Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 2 (Singapore,
December, 1878), pp. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 134;
H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of Sarawak
and British North Borneo</hi> (London,
1896), ii. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 183. Compare E.
H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>Seventeen Years among the
Sea Dyaks of Borneo</hi> (London, 1911),
pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>This song of the head
feast takes the form of a story setting
forth how the mythical hero Klieng
held a head feast on his return from
the warpath, and invited the god of
war, Singalang Burong, to attend it.
It describes at great length all that
happened on that occasion. The
singing of this song takes up the whole
night. It begins before 8 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>, and
lasts till next morning. Except for a
short interval for rest in the middle of
the night, the performers are marching
and singing all the time.</q> On the
third day of the festival the people go
out on the open-air platform in front
of the house and sacrifice a pig. <q>The
people shout together (<foreign rend='italic'>manjong</foreign>) at
short intervals until a hawk is seen
flying in the heavens. That hawk is
Singalang Burong, who has taken that
form to manifest himself to them. He
has accepted their offerings and has
heard their cry</q> (E. H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 214).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Religious
or magical
origin of
the drama.</note>
Thus the dramatic performances of these primitive peoples
are in fact religious or oftener perhaps magical ceremonies, and
the songs or recitations which accompany them are spells or
incantations, though the real character of both is apt to be
overlooked by civilized man, accustomed as he is to see in
the drama nothing more than an agreeable pastime or at best
a vehicle of moral instruction. Yet if we could trace the drama
of the civilized nations back to its origin, we might find that
it had its roots in magical or religious ideas like those which
still mould and direct the masked dances of many savages.
Certainly the Athenians in the heyday of their brilliant
civilization retained a lively sense of the religious import of
dramatic performances; for they associated them directly
with the worship of Dionysus and allowed them to be
enacted only during the festivals of the god.<note place='foot'>A. E. Haigh, <hi rend='italic'>The Attic Theatre</hi>
(Oxford, 1889), pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sqq,</hi> The religious
origin of Greek tragedy is
maintained by Professor W. Ridgeway
(<hi rend='italic'>The Origin of Tragedy</hi>, Cambridge,
1910), but he finds its immediate
inspiration in the worship of the dead
rather than in the worship of Dionysus.</note> In India,
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
also, the drama appears to have been developed out of
religious dances or pantomimes, in which the actors recited
the deeds and played the parts of national gods and heroes.<note place='foot'>H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Literatur des
alten Indien</hi> (Stuttgart and Berlin,
1903), pp. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Professor Oldenberg
holds that the evolution of the
Indian drama was probably not influenced
by that of Greece.</note>
Hence it is at least a legitimate hypothesis that the criminal,
who masqueraded as a king and perished in that character
at the Bacchanalian festival of the Sacaea, was only one of
a company of actors, who figured on that occasion in a
sacred drama of which the substance has been preserved to
us in the book of Esther.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The representation
of mythical
beings by
living men
and women
may furnish
a common
ground
where
two rival
schools of
mythology
can meet
and be
reconciled.</note>
When once we perceive that the gods and goddesses,
the heroes and heroines of mythology have been represented
officially, so to say, by a long succession of living men and
women who bore the names and were supposed to exercise
the functions of these fabulous creatures, we have attained
a point of vantage from which it seems possible to propose
terms of peace between two rival schools of mythologists
who have been waging fierce war on each other for ages. On
the one hand it has been argued that mythical beings are
nothing but personifications of natural objects and natural
processes; on the other hand, it has been maintained that
they are nothing but notable men and women who in their
lifetime, for one reason or another, made a great impression
on their fellows, but whose doings have been distorted and
exaggerated by a false and credulous tradition. These two
views, it is now easy to see, are not so mutually exclusive
as their supporters have imagined. The personages about
whom all the marvels of mythology have been told may
have been real human beings, as the Euhemerists allege;
and yet they may have been at the same time personifications
of natural objects or processes, as the adversaries of
Euhemerism assert. The doctrine of incarnation supplies
the missing link that was needed to unite the two seemingly
inconsistent theories. If the powers of nature or a certain
department of nature be conceived as personified in a deity,
and that deity can become incarnate in a man or woman, it
is obvious that the incarnate deity is at the same time a real
human being and a personification of nature. To take the
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
instance with which we are here concerned, Semiramis may
have been the great Semitic goddess of love, Ishtar or Astarte,
and yet she may be supposed to have been incarnate in a
woman or even in a series of real women, whether queens or
harlots, whose memory survives in ancient history. Saturn,
again, may have been the god of sowing and planting, and
yet may have been represented on earth by a succession or
dynasty of sacred kings, whose gay but short lives may have
contributed to build up the legend of the Golden Age. The
longer the series of such human divinities, the greater, obviously,
the chance of their myth or legend surviving; and
when moreover a deity of a uniform type was represented,
whether under the same name or not, over a great extent of
country by many local dynasties of divine men or women, it
is clear that the stories about him would tend still further to
persist and be stereotyped.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
legend of
Semiramis
and her
lovers a
duplicate
of the
myth of
Aphrodite
and
Adonis,
of Cybele
and Attis,
of Isis
and Osiris.</note>
The conclusions which we have reached in regard to the
legend of Semiramis and her lovers probably holds good of
all the similar tales that were current in antiquity throughout
the East; in particular, it may be assumed to apply to the
myths of Aphrodite and Adonis in Syria, of Cybele and
Attis in Phrygia, and of Isis and Osiris in Egypt. If we
could trace these stories back to their origin, we might find
that in every case a human couple acted year by year the
parts of the loving goddess and the dying god. We know
that down to Roman times Attis was personated by priests
who bore his name;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and if within the period of which we
have knowledge the dead Attis and the dead Adonis were
represented only by effigies, we may surmise that it had not
always been so, and that in both cases the dead god was
once represented by a dead man. Further, the license
accorded to the man who played the dying god at the
Sacaea speaks strongly in favour of the hypothesis that
before the incarnate deity was put to a public death he was
in all cases allowed, or rather required, to enjoy the embraces
of a woman who played the goddess of love. The reason
for such an enforced union of the human god and goddess
is not hard to divine. If primitive man believes that the
growth of the crops can be stimulated by the intercourse of
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
common men and women,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> what showers of blessings will
he not anticipate from the commerce of a pair whom his
fancy invests with all the dignity and powers of deities of
fertility?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sardanapalus
and
Ashurbanapal.
The
legendary
death of
Sardanapalus
in
the fire.</note>
Thus the theory of Movers, that at the Sacaea the
Zoganes represented a god and paired with a woman who
personated a goddess, turns out to rest on deeper and wider
foundations than that able scholar was aware of. He
thought that the divine couple who figured by deputy at
the ceremony were Semiramis and Sandan or Sardanapalus.
It now appears that he was substantially right as to the
goddess; but we have still to enquire into the god. There
seems to be no doubt that the name Sardanapalus is only
the Greek way of representing Ashurbanapal, the name of
the greatest and nearly the last king of Assyria. But the
records of the real monarch which have come to light within
recent years give little support to the fables that attached to
his name in classical tradition. For they prove that, far
from being the effeminate weakling he seemed to the Greeks
of a later age, he was a warlike and enlightened monarch,
who carried the arms of Assyria to distant lands and fostered
at home the growth of science and letters.<note place='foot'>C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonisch-Assyrische
Geschichte</hi> (Gotha, 1886-1888),
pp. 351 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. Jastrow,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</hi>
(Boston, U.S.A., 1898), p. 43; Sir G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Ancienne des Peuples
de l'Orient Classique</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Les Empires</hi>
(Paris, 1899), pp. 378 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; C. F. Harper,
<hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</hi>
(New York, 1901), pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Still, though
the historical reality of King Ashurbanapal is as well attested
as that of Alexander or Charlemagne, it would be no wonder
if myths gathered, like clouds, round the great figure that
loomed large in the stormy sunset of Assyrian glory. Now
the two features that stand out most prominently in the
legends of Sardanapalus are his extravagant debauchery
and his violent death in the flames of a great pyre, on
which he burned himself and his concubines to save them
from falling into the hands of his victorious enemies. It is
said that the womanish king, with painted face and arrayed
in female attire, passed his days in the seclusion of the
harem, spinning purple wool among his concubines and
wallowing in sensual delights; and that in the epitaph
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
which he caused to be carved on his tomb he recorded that
all the days of his life he ate and drank and toyed, remembering
that life is short and full of trouble, that fortune is
uncertain, and that others would soon enjoy the good things
which he must leave behind.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, xii. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, pp. 528 <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>-530 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>;
Diodorus Siculus, ii. 23 and 27;
Justin, i. 3. Several different versions
of the king's epitaph have come down
to us. I have followed the version of
Choerilus, the original of which is said
to have been carved in Chaldean letters
on a tombstone that surmounted a
great barrow at Nineveh. This
barrow may, as I suggest in the text,
have been one of the so-called mounds
of Semiramis.</note> These traits bear little
resemblance to the portrait of Ashurbanapal either in life or
in death; for after a brilliant career of conquest the Assyrian
king died in old age, at the height of human ambition, with
peace at home and triumph abroad, the admiration of his
subjects and the terror of his foes. But if the traditional
characteristics of Sardanapalus harmonize but ill with what
we know of the real monarch of that name, they fit well
enough with all that we know or can conjecture of the mock
kings who led a short life and a merry during the revelry
of the Sacaea, the Asiatic equivalent of the Saturnalia.
We can hardly doubt that for the most part such men, with
death staring them in the face at the end of a few days,
sought to drown care and deaden fear by plunging madly into
all the fleeting joys that still offered themselves under the
sun. When their brief pleasures and sharp sufferings were
over, and their bones or ashes mingled with the dust, what
more natural that on their tomb&mdash;those mounds in which
the people saw, not untruly, the graves of the lovers of
Semiramis&mdash;there should be carved some such lines as those
which tradition placed in the mouth of the great Assyrian
king, to remind the heedless passer-by of the shortness and
vanity of life?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
burning
of Sandan,
a mythical
god or
hero of
Western
Asia. K. O.
Müller's
description
of the
burning of
Sandan.</note>
When we turn to Sandan, the other legendary or mythical
being whom Movers thought that the Zoganes may have personated,
we find the arguments in support of his theory still
stronger. The city of Tarsus in Cilicia is said to have been
founded by a certain Sandan whom the Greeks identified
with Hercules; and at the festival of this god or hero an
effigy of him was burned on a great pyre.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xiv. 8; Dio
Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> xxxiii. p. 408 (vol. ii. p.
16 ed. L. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1857). Coins
of Tarsus exhibit the effigy on the pyre,
which seems to be composed of a pyramid
of great beams resting on a cubical
base. See K. O. Müller, <q>Sandon
und Sardanapal,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Kunstarchäologische
Werke</hi> (Berlin, 1873), iii. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, whose
valuable essay I follow. For fuller
details see <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,
Second Edition, pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 139 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> This Sandan is
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
doubtless the same with the Sandes whom Agathias calls the
old Persian Hercules. Professing to give a list of the gods
whom the Persians worshipped before the days of Zoroaster,
the Byzantine historian mentions Bel, Sandes, and Anaitis,
whom he identifies with Zeus, Hercules, and Aphrodite
respectively.<note place='foot'>Agathias, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> ii. 24.</note> As we know that Bel was a Babylonian, not
a Persian deity, and that in later times Anaitis was practically
equivalent to the Babylonian Ishtar or Astarte, a strong
presumption is raised that Sandes also was a Babylonian or
at all events Semitic deity, and that in speaking of him as
Persian the historian confused the ancient Persians with the
Babylonians and perhaps other stocks of Western Asia. The
presumption is strengthened when we find that in Lydia the
surname of Sandon, doubtless equivalent to Sandan, is said
to have been borne by Hercules because he wore a woman's
garment called a <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>sandyx</foreign>, fine and diaphanous as gossamer,
at the bidding of Queen Omphale, whom the hero served
for three years in the guise of a female slave, clad in
purple, humbly carding wool and submitting to be slapped
by the saucy queen with her golden slipper.<note place='foot'>Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De magistratibus</hi>,
iii. 64; Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, ii. 6.
2 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dial. deorum</hi>, xiii. 2.</note> The familiar
legend that Hercules burned himself alive on a great
pyre completes the parallel between the effeminate Hercules
Sandon of Lydia and the Assyrian Sardanapalus. So exact
a parallel must surely rest on a common base of custom as
well as of myth. That base, according to the conjecture of
the admirable scholar K. O. Müller, may have been a
custom of dressing up an effigy of an effeminate Asiatic
deity in the semblance of a reveller, and then publicly
burning it on a pyre. Such a custom appears to have prevailed
not only at Tarsus in Cilicia, but also in Lydia; for
a coin of the Lydian Philadelphia, a city which lay not far
from the old royal capital Sardes, exhibits a device like that
on coins of Tarsus, consisting of a figure stretched on a
pyre. <q>We may suppose,</q> says Müller, <q>that in the old
Assyrian mythology a certain being called Sandan, or perhaps
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
Sardan, figured beside Baal and Mylitta or Astarte.
The character of this mythical personage is one which often
meets us in oriental religion&mdash;the extreme of voluptuousness
and sensuality combined with miraculous force and heroic
strength. We may imagine that at the great festivals of
Nineveh this Sandan or Sardan was exhibited as a buxom
figure with womanish features, the pale face painted with
white lead, the eyebrows and eyelashes blackened with kohl,
his person loaded with golden chains, rings, and earrings,
arrayed in a bright red transparent garment, grasping a
goblet in one hand and perhaps, as a symbol of strength, a
double axe in the other, while he sat cross-legged and surrounded
by women on a splendidly adorned couch under a
purple canopy, altogether not unlike the figure of Adonis at
the court festivals of Alexandria. Then the people of <q>mad
Nineveh,</q> as the poet Phocylides called it, <q>the well-favoured
harlot,</q> as the prophet Nahum has it, would rejoice and
make merry with this their darling hero. Afterwards there
may have been another show, when this gorgeous Sandan or
Sardan was to be seen on a huge pyre of precious wood,
draped in gold-embroidered tapestry and laden with incense
and spices of every sort, which being set on fire, to the
howling of a countless multitude and the deafening din
of shrill music, sent up a monstrous pillar of fire whirling
towards heaven and flooded half Nineveh with smoke and
smell.</q><note place='foot'>K. O. Müller, <q>Sandon und Sardanapal,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Kunstarchäologische Werke</hi>
(Berlin, 1873), iii. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer
adds that there is authority for every
stroke in the picture. His principal
source is the sixty-second speech of
Dio Chrysostom (vol. ii. p. 202 ed.
L. Dindorf), where the unmanly Sardanapalus,
seated cross-legged on a
gilded couch with purple hangings, is
compared to <q>the Adonis for whom
the women wail.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Death
in the fire
of men who
personate
gods or
heroes.</note>
The distinguished scholar whom I have just quoted does
not fail to recognize the part which imagination plays in the
picture he has set before us; but he reminds us very properly
that in historical enquiries imagination must always supply
the cement that binds together the broken fragments of tradition.
One thing, he thinks, emerges clearly from the present
investigation: the worship and legend of an effeminate hero
like Sandan appear to have spread, by means of an early
diffusion of the Semitic stock, first to the neighbourhood of
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
Tarsus in Cilicia and afterwards to Sardes in Lydia. In
favour of the former prevalence of the rite in Lydia it may
be added that the oldest dynasty of Lydian kings traced
their descent, not only from the mythical Assyrian hero
Ninus, but also from the Greek hero Hercules,<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 7.</note> whose
legendary death in the fire finds at least a curious echo in
the story that Croesus, the last king of Lydia, was laid by
his Persian conqueror Cyrus on a great pyre of wood, and
was only saved at the last moment from being consumed in
the flames.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, with J. C.
F. Bähr's note. According to another
and perhaps more probable tradition
the king sought a voluntary death in
the flames. See Bacchylides, iii. 24-62;
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> May not this story embody a reminiscence of
the manner in which the ancient kings of Lydia, as living
embodiments of their god, formerly met their end? It was
thus, as we have seen, that the old Prussian rulers used to
burn themselves alive in front of the sacred oak;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and by
an odd coincidence, if it is nothing more, the Greek Hercules
directed that the pyre on which he was to be consumed
should be made of the wood of the oak and the wild olive.<note place='foot'><p>Sophocles, <hi rend='italic'>Trachiniae</hi>, 1195 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>:
</p>
<p>
πολλὴν μὲν ὕλην τῆς βαθυρρίζου δρυὸς
κείραντα πολλὸν δ᾽ ἄρσεν ἐκτεμόνθ᾽ ὁμοῦ
ἄγριον ἔλαιον, σῶμα τουμὸν ἐμβαλεῖν.
</p>
<p>
The passage was pointed out to me by
my friend the late Dr. A. W. Verrall.
The poet's language suggests that of old
a sacred fire was kindled by the friction
of oak and wild olive wood, and that
in accordance with a notion common
among rude peoples, one of the pieces
of wood (in this case the wild olive)
was regarded as male and the other (the
oak) as female. On this hypothesis,
the fire was kindled by drilling a hole
in a piece of oak with a stick of wild
olive. As to the different sorts of wood
used by the ancients in making fire by
friction, see A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft
des Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh,
1886), pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 249
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In South Africa a special fire is
procured for sacrifices by the friction
of two pieces of the <foreign rend='italic'>Uzwati</foreign> tree,
which are known respectively as husband
and wife. See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn
and of the Wild</hi>, ii. 65.</p></note>
Some grounds have also been shewn for thinking that in
certain South African tribes the chiefs may formerly have
been burnt alive as a religious or magical ceremony.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, ii. 68.</note> All
these facts and indications tend to support the view of
Movers that at the Sacaea also the man who played the god
for five days was originally burnt at the end of them.<note place='foot'>F. C. Movers, <hi rend='italic'>Die Phoenizier</hi>, i.
(Bonn, 1841) p. 496.</note>
Death by hanging or crucifixion may have been a later
mitigation of his sufferings, though it is quite possible that
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
both forms of execution or rather of sacrifice may have been
combined by hanging or crucifying the victim first and
burning him afterwards,<note place='foot'>This suggestion was made by F.
Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi> (Heilbronn,
1879), p. 9. It occurred to me independently.</note> much as our forefathers used to
disembowel traitors after suspending them for a few minutes
on a gibbet. At Tarsus apparently the custom was still
further softened by burning an effigy instead of a man; but
on this point the evidence is not explicit. It is worth
observing that as late as Lucian's time the principal festival
of the year at Hierapolis&mdash;the great seat of the worship of
Astarte&mdash;fell at the beginning of spring and took its name
of the Pyre or the Torch from the tall masts which were
burnt in the court of the temple with sheep, goats, and
other animals hanging from them.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 49.</note> Here the season, the
fire, and the gallows-tree all fit our hypothesis; only the
man-god is wanting.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Traces
of human
sacrifice in
the Jewish
festival of
Purim;
effigies of
Haman
burnt.</note>
If the Jewish festival of Purim was, as I have attempted
to shew, directly descended either from the Sacaea or from
some other Semitic festival, of which the central feature was
the sacrifice of a man in the character of a god, we should
expect to find traces of human sacrifice lingering about it in
one or other of those mitigated forms to which I have just
referred. This expectation is fully borne out by the facts.
For from an early time it has been customary with the Jews
at the feast of Purim to burn or otherwise destroy effigies of
Haman. The practice was well known under the Roman
empire, for in the year 408 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> the emperors Honorius and
Theodosius issued a decree commanding the governors of the
provinces to take care that the Jews should not burn effigies of
Haman on a cross at one of their festivals.<note place='foot'>Codex Theodosianus, Lib. <hi rend='smallcaps'>xvi.</hi>
Tit. viii. § 18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Judaeos quodam festivitatis
suae solleni Aman ad poenae
quondam recordationem incendere, et
sanctae crucis adsimulatam speciem in
contemptu Christianae fidei sacrilega
mente exurere provinciarum rectores
prohibeant: ne locis suis fidei nostrae
signum immisceant, sed ritus suos infra
contemptum Christianae legis retineant:
amissuri sine dubio permissa hactenus,
nisi ab inlicitis temperaverint.</foreign></q> The
decree is dated at Constantinople, in
the consulship of Bassus and Philip.
For <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locis</foreign> we should probably read <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jocis</foreign>
with Mommsen.</note> We learn from
the decree that the custom gave great offence to the Christians,
who regarded it as a blasphemous parody of the central
mystery of their own religion, little suspecting that it was
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
nothing but a continuation, in a milder form, of a rite that
had probably been celebrated in the East long ages before
the birth of Christ. Apparently the custom long survived
the publication of the edict, for in a form of abjuration which
the Greek church imposed on Jewish converts and which
seems to date from the tenth century, the renegade is made
to speak as follows: <q>I curse also those who celebrate the
festival of the so-called Mordecai on the first Sabbath
(Saturday) of the Christian fast, and who nail Haman forsooth
to the tree, attaching to it the symbol of the cross and
burning him along with it, while they heap all sorts of
imprecations and curses on the Christians.</q><note place='foot'>Fr. Cumont, <q>Une formule grecque
de renonciation au judaïsme,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Wiener
Studien</hi>, xxiv. (1902) p. 468. The
<q>Christian fast</q> referred to in the
formula is no doubt Lent. The mention
of the Jewish Sabbath (the Christian
Saturday) raises a difficulty, which
has been pointed out by the editor,
Franz Cumont, in a note (p. 470):
<q>The festival of Purim was celebrated
on the 14th of Adar, that is, in February
or March, about the beginning of
the Christian Lent; but that festival,
the date of which is fixed in the Jewish
calendar, does not always fall on a
Saturday. Either the author made a
mistake or the civil authority obliged
the Jews to transfer their rejoicings to
a Sabbath</q> (Saturday).</note> A Jewish
account of the custom as it was observed in Babylonia
and Persia in the tenth century of our era runs as follows:
<q>It is customary in Babylonia and Elam for boys to make
an effigy resembling Haman; this they suspend on their
roofs, four or five days before Purim. On Purim day they
erect a bonfire, and cast the effigy into its midst, while the
boys stand round about it jesting and singing. And they
have a ring suspended in the midst of the fire, which (ring)
they hold and wave from one side of the fire to the other.</q><note place='foot'>Israel Abrahams, <hi rend='italic'>The Book of
Delight and other Papers</hi> (Philadelphia,
1912), pp. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr. Abrahams
ingeniously suggests (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 267
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) that the ring waved over the fire
was an emblem of the sun, and that
the kindling of the Purim fires was
originally a ceremony of imitative
magic to ensure a supply of solar
light and heat.</note>
Again, the Arab historian Albîrûnî, who wrote in the year
1000 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, informs us that at Purim the Jews of his time
rejoiced greatly over the death of Haman, and that they made
figures which they beat and burned, <q>imitating the burning
of Haman.</q> Hence one name for the festival was Hâmân-Sûr.<note place='foot'>Albîrûnî, <hi rend='italic'>The Chronology of Ancient
Nations</hi>, translated and edited by Dr.
C. Edward Sachau (London, 1879),
pp. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Another Arabic writer, Makrîzî, who died in 1442 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>,
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
says that at the feast of Purim, which fell on the fifteenth
day of the month Adar, some of the Jews used to make
effigies of Haman which they first played with and then
threw into the fire.<note place='foot'>Quoted by Lagarde, <q>Purim,</q>
p. 13 (<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königlichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu
Göttingen</hi>, xxxiv. 1887).</note> During the Middle Ages the Italian
Jews celebrated Purim in a lively fashion which has been
compared by their own historians to that of the Carnival.
The children used to range themselves in rows opposite
each other and pelt one another with nuts, while grown-up
people rode on horseback through the streets with pine
branches in their hands or blew trumpets and made merry
round a puppet representing Haman, which was set on a
platform or scaffold and then solemnly burnt on a pyre.<note place='foot'>M. Güdemann, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Erziehungswesens und der Cultur der
abendländischen Juden</hi> (Vienna, 1880-1888),
ii. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; I. Abrahams, <hi rend='italic'>Jewish
Life in the Middle Ages</hi> (London,
1896), pp. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In the eighteenth century the Jews of Frankfort used at
Purim to make pyramids of thin wax candles, which they
set on fire; also they fashioned images of Haman and his
wife out of candles and burned them on the reading-desk in
the synagogue.<note place='foot'>J. J. Schudt, <hi rend='italic'>Jüdische Merkwürdigkeiten</hi>
(Frankfort and Leipsic, 1714),
ii. Theil, p. 309.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Accusations
of
ritual
murder
brought
against the
Jews. The
accusations
probably
false.</note>
Now, when we consider the close correspondence in
character as well as in date between the Jewish Purim and
the Christian Carnival, and remember further that the effigy
of Carnival, which is now destroyed at this merry season,
had probably its prototype in a living man who was put to
a violent death in the character of Saturn at the Saturnalia,
analogy of itself would suggest that in former times the
Jews, like the Babylonians, from whom they appear to have
derived their Purim, may at one time have burned, hanged,
or crucified a real man in the character of Haman. There
are some positive grounds for thinking that this was so.
The early church historian Socrates informs us that at
Inmestar, a town in Syria, the Jews were wont to observe
certain sports among themselves, in the course of which
they played many foolish pranks. In the year 416 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>,
being heated with wine, they carried these sports further
than usual and began deriding Christians and even Christ
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
himself, and to give the more zest to their mockery they
seized a Christian child, bound him to a cross, and hung
him up. At first they only laughed and jeered at him, but
soon, their passions getting the better of them, they ill-treated
the child so that he died under their hands. The
thing got noised abroad, and resulted in a serious brawl
between the Jews and their Christian neighbours. The
authorities then stepped in, and the Jews had to pay dear
for the crime they had perpetrated in sport.<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Ecclesiastica</hi>,
vii. 16; Theophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Chronographia</hi>,
ed. J. Classen (Bonn, 1839-1841),
vol. i. p. 129. Theophanes places the
event in the year 408 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> From
a note in Migne's edition of Socrates,
I learn that in the Alexandrian
calendar, which Theophanes used, the
year 408 corresponded to the year
which in our reckoning began on the
first of September 415. Hence if the
murder was perpetrated in spring at
Purim it must have taken place in 416.</note> The Christian
historian does not mention, and perhaps did not know, the
name of the drunken and jovial festival which ended so
tragically; but we can hardly doubt that it was Purim, and
that the boy who died on the cross represented Haman.<note place='foot'>This is the view of H. Graetz
(<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der Juden</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> iv. Leipsic,
1866, pp. 393 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) and Dr. M. R.
James (<hi rend='italic'>Life and Miracles of St. William
of Norwich</hi> (Cambridge, 1896), by A.
Jessopp and M. R. James, pp. lxiii.
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
In mediæval and modern times many accusations of ritual
murders, as they are called, have been brought against the
Jews, and the arguments for and against the charge have
been discussed on both sides with a heat which, however
natural, has tended rather to inflame the passions of the
disputants than to elicit the truth.<note place='foot'>For an examination of some of
these reported murders, see M. R.
James, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. lxii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. L.
Strack, <hi rend='italic'>Das Blut im Glauben und
Aberglauben der Menschheit</hi> (Munich,
1900), pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Both writers
incline to dismiss the charges as
groundless.</note> Into this troubled arena
I prefer not to enter; I will only observe that, so far as I
have looked into the alleged cases, and these are reported
in sufficient detail, the majority of the victims are said to
have been children and to have met their fate in spring,
often in the week before Easter. This last circumstance
points, if there is any truth in the accusations, to a connexion
of the human sacrifice with the Passover, which falls
in this week, rather than with Purim, which falls a month
earlier. Indeed it has often been made a part of the accusation
that the blood of the youthful victims was intended to
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
be used at the Passover. If all the charges of ritual murder
which have been brought against the Jews in modern times are
not, as seems most probable, mere idle calumnies, the baneful
fruit of bigotry, ignorance, and malice, the extraordinary
tenacity of life exhibited by the lowest forms of superstition
in the minds of ignorant people, whether they are Jews or
Gentiles, would suffice to account for an occasional recrudescence
of primitive barbarity among the most degraded part
of the Jewish community. To make the Jews as a nation
responsible for outrages which, if they occur at all, are
doubtless quite as repugnant to them as they are to every
humane mind, would be a monstrous injustice; it would be
as fair to charge Christians in general with complicity in
the incalculably greater number of massacres and atrocities
of every kind that have been perpetrated by Christians in
the name of Christianity, not merely on Jews and heathen,
but on men and women and children who professed&mdash;and
died for&mdash;the same faith as their torturers and murderers.
If deeds of the sort alleged have been really done by Jews&mdash;a
question on which I must decline to pronounce an opinion&mdash;they
would interest the student of custom as isolated
instances of reversion to an old and barbarous ritual which
once flourished commonly enough among the ancestors both
of Jews and Gentiles, but on which, as on a noxious monster,
an enlightened humanity has long set its heel. Such
customs die hard; it is not the fault of society as a whole
if sometimes the reptile has strength enough left to lift
its venomous head and sting.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mitigation
of human
sacrifice
by the
substitution
of a
criminal
for the
victim.</note>
But between the stage when human sacrifice goes on
unabashed in the light of common day, and the stage when
it has been driven out of sight into dark holes and corners,
there intervenes a period during which the custom is slowly
dwindling away under the growing light of knowledge and
philanthropy. In this middle period many subterfuges are
resorted to for the sake of preserving the old ritual in a
form which will not offend the new morality. A common
and successful device is to consummate the sacrifice on the
person of a malefactor, whose death at the altar or elsewhere
is little likely to excite pity or indignation, since it
partakes of the character of a punishment, and people recognize
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
that if the miscreant had not been dealt with by the
priest, it would have been needful in the public interest to
hand him over to the executioner. We have seen that in
the Rhodian sacrifices to Cronus a condemned criminal was
after a time substituted for an innocent victim;<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and there
can be little doubt that at Babylon the criminals, who
perished in the character of gods at the Sacaea, enjoyed an
honour which, at an earlier period, had been reserved for
more respectable persons. It seems therefore by no means
impossible that the Jews, in borrowing the Sacaea from
Babylon under the new name of Purim, should have borrowed
along with it the custom of putting to death a malefactor
who, after masquerading as Mordecai in a crown and royal
robe, was hanged or crucified in the character of Haman.
There are some grounds for thinking that this or something
of this sort was done; but a consideration of them had
better be deferred till we have cleared up some points which
still remain obscure in Purim, and in the account which the
Jews give of its origin.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <q>fast
of Esther</q>
before
Purim. Jensen's
theory
that the
<q>fast of
Esther</q>
was originally
a
mourning
for the
annual
death of a
deity like
Tammuz.</note>
In the first place, then, it deserves to be remarked that
the joyous festival of Purim on the fourteenth and fifteenth
days of the month Adar is invariably preceded by a fast,
known as the fast of Esther, on the thirteenth; indeed, some
Jews fast for several days before Purim.<note place='foot'>J. Buxtorf, <hi rend='italic'>Synagoga Judaica</hi> (Bâle,
1661), cap. xxix. p. 554; J. Chr. G.
Bodenschatz, <hi rend='italic'>Kirchliche Verfassung der
heutigen Juden</hi> (Erlangen, 1748), ii.
253 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the book of
Esther the fast is traditionally explained as a commemoration
of the mourning and lamentation excited among the
Jews by the decree of King Ahasuerus that they should all
be massacred on the thirteenth day of the month Adar; for
<q>in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment
and his decree came, there was great mourning among the
Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in
sackcloth and ashes.</q> And Esther, before she went into the
presence of the king to plead for the lives of her people,
<q>bade them return answer unto Mordecai, Go, gather together
all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me,
and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also
and my maidens will fast in like manner.</q> Hence fasting
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
and lamentation were ordained as the proper preparation for
the happy feast of Purim which commemorated the great deliverance
of the Jews from the destruction that had threatened
them on the thirteenth day of Adar.<note place='foot'>Esther iv. 3 and 16, ix. 31.</note> Now we have seen
that, in the opinion of some eminent modern scholars, the
basis of the book of Esther is not history but a Babylonian
myth, which celebrated the triumphs and sufferings of
deities rather than of men. On this hypothesis, how is
the fast that precedes Purim to be explained? The best
solution appears to be that of Jensen, that the fasting and
mourning were originally for the supposed annual death
of a Semitic god or hero of the type of Tammuz or
Adonis, whose resurrection on the following day occasioned
that outburst of joy and gladness which is characteristic of
Purim. The particular god or hero, whose death and resurrection
thus touched with sorrow and filled with joy the hearts
of his worshippers, may have been, according to Jensen, either
the great hero Gilgamesh, or his comrade and friend Eabani.<note place='foot'>So far as I know, Professor Jensen
has not yet published his theory, but
he has stated it in letters to correspondents.
See W. Nowack, <hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch
der hebräischen Archäologie</hi> (Freiburg
i. Baden and Leipsic, 1894), ii. 200;
H. Günkel, <hi rend='italic'>Schöpfung und Chaos</hi>
(Göttingen, 1895), pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; D. G.
Wildeboer, in his commentary on
Esther, pp. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Kurzer Hand-Commentar
zum Alten Testament</hi>,
herausgegeben von D. K. Marti, Lieferung
6, Freiburg i. B., 1898). In
the Babylonian calendar the 13th of
Adar was so far a fast day that on it
no fish or fowl might be eaten. In
one tablet the 13th of Adar is marked
<q>not good,</q> while the 14th and 15th
are marked <q>good.</q> See C. H. W.
Johns, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Purim,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Biblica</hi>, iii. (London, 1902) col. 3980.</note>
The doughty deeds and adventures of this mighty pair are
the theme of the longest Babylonian poem that has been as
yet discovered. It is recorded on twelve tablets, and this circumstance
has suggested to some scholars the view that the
story may be a solar myth, descriptive of the sun's annual
course through the twelve months or the twelve signs of the
zodiac. However that may be, the scene of the poem is
laid chiefly at the very ancient Babylonian city of Erech, the
chief seat of the worship of the goddess Ishtar or Astarte, who
plays an important part in the story. For the goddess is said
to have been smitten with the charms of Gilgamesh, and to
have made love to him; but he spurned her proffered favours,
and thereafter fell into a sore sickness, probably through the
wrath of the offended goddess. His comrade Eabani also
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
roused the fury of Ishtar, and was wounded to death. For
twelve days he lingered on a bed of pain, and, when he died,
his friend Gilgamesh mourned and lamented for him, and
rested not until he had prevailed on the god of the dead to
suffer the spirit of Eabani to return to the upper world. The
resurrection of Eabani, recorded on the twelfth tablet, forms
the conclusion of the long poem.<note place='foot'>M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria</hi> (Boston, U.S.A.,
1898), pp. 471 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 475 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 481-486,
510-512; L. W. King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion
and Mythology</hi> (London, 1899),
pp. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P. Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrisch-Babylonische
Mythen und Epen</hi> (Berlin,
1900), pp. 116-273; R. F. Harper,
<hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</hi>
(New York, 1901), pp. 324-368; H.
Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften
und das Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1902), pp. 566-582; <hi rend='italic'>Das Gilgamesch-Epos,
neu übersetzt von</hi> Arthur
Ungnad <hi rend='italic'>und gemeinverständlich erklärt
von</hi> Hugo Gressmann (Göttingen, 1911).
Professor Jastrow points out that though
a relation cannot be traced between
each of the tablets of the poem and the
corresponding month of the year, such
a relation appears undoubtedly to exist
between some of the tablets and the
months. Thus, for example, the sixth
tablet describes the affection of Ishtar
for Gilgamesh, and the visit which she
paid to Anu, her father in heaven, to
complain of the hero's contemptuous
rejection of her love. Now the sixth
Babylonian month was called the <q>Mission
of Ishtar,</q> and in it was held the
festival of Tammuz, the hapless lover
of the goddess. Again, the story of the
great flood is told in the eleventh tablet,
and the eleventh month was called the
<q>month of rain.</q> See M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> pp. 484, 510.</note> Jensen's theory is that
the death and resurrection of a mythical being, who combined
in himself the features of a solar god and an ancient
king of Erech, were celebrated at the Babylonian Zakmuk or
festival of the New Year, and that the transference of the
drama from Erech, its original seat, to Babylon led naturally
to the substitution of Marduk, the great god of Babylon, for
Gilgamesh or Eabani in the part of the hero. Although
Jensen apparently does not identify the Zakmuk with the
Sacaea, a little consideration will shew how well his general
theory of Zakmuk fits in with those features of the Sacaean
festival which have emerged in the course of our enquiry.
At the Sacaean festival, if I am right, a man, who personated
a god or hero of the type of Tammuz or Adonis, enjoyed
the favours of a woman, probably a sacred harlot, who represented
the great Semitic goddess Ishtar or Astarte; and
after he had thus done his part towards securing, by means
of sympathetic magic, the revival of plant life in spring, he
was put to death. We may suppose that the death of this
divine man was mourned over by his worshippers, and especially
by women, in much the same fashion as the women of
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
Jerusalem wept for Tammuz at the gate of the temple,<note place='foot'>Ezekiel viii. 14.</note> and
as Syrian damsels mourned the dead Adonis, while the river
ran red with his blood. Such rites appear, in fact, to have
been common all over Western Asia; the particular name of
the dying god varied in different places, but in substance the
ritual was the same. Fundamentally, the custom was a religious
or rather magical ceremony intended to ensure the
revival and reproduction of life in spring.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The resurrection
of
the dead
god perhaps
represented
by
a living
man who
afterwards
died in
earnest
in the
character
of the god.
This would
explain the
apparent
duplication
of the
principal
characters
in the
book of
Esther:
Haman
and Vashti
would
represent
the gods
dying,
while
Mordecai
and Esther
would
represent
the gods
rising from
the dead.</note>
Now, if this interpretation of the Sacaea is correct, it is
obvious that one important feature of the ceremony is wanting
in the brief notices of the festival that have come down to us.
The death of the man-god at the festival is recorded, but
nothing is said of his resurrection. Yet if he really personated
a being of the Adonis or Attis type, we may feel pretty sure
that his dramatic death was followed at a shorter or longer
interval by his dramatic revival, just as at the festivals of
Attis and Adonis the resurrection of the dead god quickly
succeeded to his mimic death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 227.</note> Here, however, a difficulty
presents itself. At the Sacaea the man-god died a real, not
a mere mimic death; and in ordinary life the resurrection
even of a man-god is at least not an everyday occurrence.
What was to be done? The man, or rather the god, was
undoubtedly dead. How was he to come to life again?
Obviously the best, if not the only way, was to set another and
living man to support the character of the reviving god, and
we may conjecture that this was done. We may suppose
that the insignia of royalty which had adorned the dead
man were transferred to his successor, who, arrayed in them,
would be presented to his rejoicing worshippers as their god
come to life again; and by his side would probably be
displayed a woman in the character of his divine consort,
the goddess Ishtar or Astarte. In favour of this hypothesis
it may be observed that it at once furnishes a clear and
intelligible explanation of a remarkable feature in the book
of Esther which has not yet, so far as I am aware, been
adequately elucidated; I mean that apparent duplication of
the principal characters to which I have already directed
the reader's attention. If I am right, Haman represents
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
the temporary king or mortal god who was put to death at
the Sacaea; and his rival Mordecai represents the other
temporary king who, on the death of his predecessor, was
invested with his royal insignia, and exhibited to the
people as the god come to life again. Similarly Vashti,
the deposed queen in the narrative, corresponds to the
woman who played the part of queen and goddess to
the first mock king, the Haman; and her successful rival,
Esther or Ishtar, answers to the woman who figured as the
divine consort of the second mock king, the Mordecai or
Marduk. A trace of the sexual license accorded to the
mock king of the festival seems to be preserved in the
statement that King Ahasuerus found Haman fallen on the
bed with Esther and asked, <q>Will he even force the queen
before me in the house?</q><note place='foot'>Esther vii. 8.</note> We have seen that the mock
king of the Sacaea did actually possess the right of using
the real king's concubines, and there is much to be said for
the view of Movers that he began his short reign by exercising
the right in public.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>.</note> In the parallel ritual of Adonis
the marriage of the goddess with her ill-fated lover was
publicly celebrated the day before his mimic death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 183.</note> A
clear reminiscence of the time when the relation between
Esther and Mordecai was conceived as much more intimate
than mere cousinship appears to be preserved in some of
the Jewish plays acted at Purim, in which Mordecai appears
as the lover of Esther; and this significant indication is
confirmed by the teaching of the rabbis that King Ahasuerus
never really knew Esther, but that a phantom in her likeness
lay with him while the real Esther sat on the lap of
Mordecai.<note place='foot'>J. J. Schudt, <hi rend='italic'>Jüdische Merkwürdigkeiten</hi>
(Frankfort and Leipsic, 1714),
ii. Theil, p. 316.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Persian
setting of
the book
of Esther. The
Persian
ceremony
of the
<q>Ride of
the Beardless
One</q>
in spring.</note>
The Persian setting, in which the Hebrew author of the
book of Esther has framed his highly-coloured picture,
naturally suggests that the Jews derived their feast of
Purim not directly from the old Babylonians, but from their
Persian conquerors. Even if this could be demonstrated, it
would in no way invalidate the theory that Purim originated
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
in the Babylonian festival of the Sacaea, since we know
that the Sacaea was celebrated by the Persians.<note place='foot'>Dio Chrysostom makes Diogenes
say to Alexander the Great, οὐκ
ἐννενόηκας τὴν τῶν Σακαίων ἑορτήν, ἢν
Πέρσαι ἄγουσιν (<hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> iv. vol. i. p. 76 ed.
L. Dindorf). The festival was mentioned
by Ctesias in the second book of
his Persian history (Athenaeus, xiv. 44
p. 639 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>); and down to the time of
Strabo it was associated with the
nominal worship of the Persian goddess
Anaitis (Strabo, xi. 8. 4 and 5, p.
512).</note> Hence it
becomes worth while to enquire whether in the Persian
religion we can detect any traces of a festival akin to the
Sacaea or Purim. Here Lagarde has shewn the way by
directing attention to the old Persian ceremony known as
the <q>Ride of the Beardless One.</q><note place='foot'>Lagarde, <q>Purim,</q> pp. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königl. Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen</hi>, xxxiv.
1887).</note> This was a rite performed
both in Persia and Babylonia at the beginning of
spring, on the first day of the first month, which in the
most ancient Persian calendar corresponded to March, so
that the date of the ceremony agrees with that of the
Babylonian New Year festival of Zakmuk. A beardless
and, if possible, one-eyed buffoon was set naked on an ass,
a horse, or a mule, and conducted in a sort of mock triumph
through the streets of the city. In one hand he held a
crow and in the other a fan, with which he fanned himself,
complaining of the heat, while the people pelted him with
ice and snow and drenched him with cold water. He was
supposed to drive away the cold, and to aid him perhaps in
discharging this useful function he was fed with hot food,
and hot stuffs were smeared on his body. Riding on his
ass and attended by all the king's household, if the city
happened to be the capital, or, if it was not, by all the
retainers of the governor, who were also mounted, he
paraded the streets and extorted contributions. He stopped
at the doors of the rich, and if they did not give him what
he asked for, he befouled their garments with mud or a
mixture of red ochre and water, which he carried in an
earthenware pot. If a shopkeeper hesitated a moment to
respond to his demands, the importunate beggar had the
right to confiscate all the goods in the shop; so the tradesmen
who saw him bearing down on them, not unnaturally
hastened to anticipate his wants by contributing of their
substance before he could board them. Everything that he
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
thus collected from break of day to the time of morning
prayers belonged to the king or governor of the city; but
everything that he laid hands on between the first and the
second hour of prayer he kept for himself. After the
second prayers he disappeared, and if the people caught
him later in the day they were free to beat him to their
heart's content. <q>In like manner,</q> proceeds one of the
native writers who has described the custom, <q>people at the
present time appoint a New Year Lord and make merry.
And this they do because the season, which is the beginning
of Azur or March, coincides with the sun's entry into Aries,
for on that day they disport themselves and rejoice because
the winter is over.</q><note place='foot'>Th. Hyde, <hi rend='italic'>Historia religionis veterum
Persarum</hi> (Oxford, 1700), pp.
183, 249-251; Albîrûnî, <hi rend='italic'>The Chronology
of Ancient Nations</hi>, translated and
edited by Dr. C. Edward Sachau
(London, 1879), p. 211.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
<q>Beardless
One</q> in
the Persian
ceremony is
apparently
the degenerate
successor
of a
temporary
king.</note>
Now in this harlequin, who rode through the streets
attended by all the king's men, and levying contributions
which went either to the royal treasury or to the pocket of
the collector, we recognize the familiar features of the mock
or temporary king, who is invested for a short time with the
pomp and privileges of royalty for reasons which have been
already explained.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The abrupt disappearance of the
Persian clown at a certain hour of the day, coupled with
the leave given to the populace to thrash him if they found
him afterwards, points plainly enough to the harder fate
that probably awaited him in former days, when he paid
with his life for his brief tenure of a kingly crown. The
resemblance between his burlesque progress and that of
Mordecai through the streets of Susa is obvious; though
the Jewish author of Esther has depicted in brighter colours
the pomp of his hero <q>in royal apparel of blue and white,
and with a great crown of gold, and with a robe of fine
linen and purple,</q> riding the king's own charger, and led
through the city by one of the king's most noble princes.<note place='foot'>Esther vi. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, viii. 15.</note>
The difference between the two scenes is probably not to
be explained simply by the desire of the Jewish writer to
shed a halo of glory round the personage whom he regarded
as the deliverer of his people. So long as the temporary
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
king was a real substitute for the reigning monarch, and had
to die sooner or later in his stead, it was natural that he
should be treated with a greater show of deference, and
should simulate his royal brother more closely than a clown
who had nothing worse than a beating to fear when he laid
down his office. In short, after the serious meaning of the
custom had been forgotten, and the substitute was allowed
to escape with his life, the high tragedy of the ancient ceremony
would rapidly degenerate into farce.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <q>Ride
of the
Beardless
One</q>
seems to be
a magical
ceremony
for the
expulsion
of winter.</note>
But while the <q>Ride of the Beardless One</q> is, from
one point of view, a degenerate copy of the original,
regarded from another point of view, it preserves some
features which are almost certainly primitive, though they
do not appear in the kindred Babylonian and Jewish festivals.
The Persian custom bears the stamp of a popular festivity
rather than of a state ceremonial, and everywhere it seems
as if popular festivals, when left to propagate themselves
freely among the folk, reveal their old meaning and intention
more transparently than when they have been adopted
into the official religion and enshrined in a ritual. The
simple thoughts of our simple forefathers are better understood
by their unlettered descendants than by the majority
of educated people; their rude rites are more faithfully preserved
and more truly interpreted by a rude peasantry than
by the priest, who wraps up their nakedness in the gorgeous
pall of religious pomp, or by the philosopher, who dissolves
their crudities into the thin air of allegory. In the present
instance the purpose of the <q>Ride of the Beardless One</q>
at the beginning of spring is sufficiently obvious; it was
meant to hasten the departure of winter and the approach
of summer. We are expressly told that the clown who
went about fanning himself and complaining of the heat,
while the populace snowballed him, was supposed to dispel
the cold; and even without any such assurance we should
be justified in inferring as much from his behaviour. On
the principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic, which is
little more than an elaborate system of make-believe, you
can make the weather warm by pretending that it is so; or
if you cannot, you may be sure that there is some person
wiser than yourself who can. Such a wizard, in the estimation
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
of the Persians, was the beardless one-eyed man who
went through the performance I have described; and no
doubt his physical defects were believed to contribute in
some occult manner to the success of the rite. The ceremony
was thus, as Lagarde acutely perceived, the oriental
equivalent of those popular European customs which celebrate
the advent of spring by representing in a dramatic form the
expulsion or defeat of winter by the victorious summer.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But
whereas in Europe the two rival seasons are often, if not
regularly, personated by two actors or two effigies, in Persia
a single actor sufficed. Whether he definitely represented
winter or summer is not quite clear; but his pretence of
suffering from heat and his final disappearance suggest that,
if he personified either of the seasons, it was the departing
winter rather than the coming summer.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
opposition
of Haman
and Vashti
to Mordecai
and
Esther
seems to be
a contrast
between
the annual
death of
nature in
winter and
its revival
in spring.</note>
If there is any truth in the connexion thus traced
between Purim and the <q>Ride of the Beardless One,</q> we
are now in a position finally to unmask the leading personages
in the book of Esther. I have attempted to shew that
Haman and Vashti are little more than doubles of Mordecai
and Esther, who in turn conceal under a thin disguise the
features of Marduk and Ishtar, the great god and goddess
of Babylon. But why, the reader may ask, should the
divine pair be thus duplicated and the two pairs set in
opposition to each other? The answer is suggested by
the popular European celebrations of spring to which I have
just adverted. If my interpretation of these customs is right,
the contrast between the summer and winter, or between
the life and death, which figure in effigy or in the persons
of living representatives at the spring ceremonies of our
peasantry, is fundamentally a contrast between the dying or
dead vegetation of the old and the sprouting vegetation
of the new year&mdash;a contrast which would lose nothing of
its point when, as in ancient Rome and Babylon and
Persia, the beginning of spring was also the beginning of
the new year. In these and in all the ceremonies we
have been examining the antagonism is not between powers
of a different order, but between the same power viewed in
different aspects as old and young; it is, in short, nothing
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
but the eternal and pathetic contrast between youth and
age. And as the power or spirit of vegetation is represented
in religious ritual and popular custom by a human
pair, whether they be called Ishtar and Tammuz, or Venus
and Adonis, or the Queen and King of May, so we may
expect to find the old decrepit spirit of the past year personated
by one pair, and the fresh young spirit of the new
year by another. This, if my hypothesis is right, is the
ultimate explanation of the struggle between Haman and
Vashti on the one side, and their doubles Mordecai and
Esther on the other. In the last analysis both pairs stood
for the powers that make for the fertility of plants and
perhaps also of animals;<note place='foot'><p>The goddess Ishtar certainly seems
to have embodied the principle of fertility
in animals as well as in plants;
for in the poem which describes her
descent into the world of the dead it
is said that
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>After the mistress Ishtar had descended to the land of No-Return,<lb/>
The bull did not mount the cow, nor did the ass leap upon the she-ass,<lb/>
The man did not approach the maid in the street,<lb/>
The man lay down to sleep upon his own couch,<lb/>
While the maid slept by herself.</hi></q>
</p>
<p>
See C. F. Harper, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian
Literature</hi> (New York, 1901),
pp. 410 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P. Jensen, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrisch-Babylonische
Mythen und Epen</hi> (Berlin,
1900), p. 87.</p></note> but the one pair embodied the
failing energies of the past, and the other the vigorous and
growing energies of the coming year.<note place='foot'>The interpretation here given of
the four principal personages in the
book of Esther was suggested by me in
the second edition of this book (1900).
It agrees substantially with the one
which has since been adopted by Professor
H. Zimmern (in E. Schrader's
<hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
Berlin, 1902, p. 519), and by
Professor P. Haupt (<hi rend='italic'>Purim</hi>, Leipsic,
1906, pp. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> Both powers, on
my hypothesis, were personified not merely in myth, but in
custom; for year by year a human couple undertook to
quicken the life of nature by a union in which, as in a
microcosm, the loves of tree and plant, of herb and flower,
of bird and beast were supposed in some mystic fashion to
be summed up.<note place='foot'>In this connexion it deserves to
be noted that among the ancient
Persians marriages are said to have
been usually celebrated at the vernal
equinox (Strabo, xv. 3. 17, p. 733).</note> Originally, we may conjecture, such couples
exercised their functions for a whole year, on the conclusion
of which the male partner&mdash;the divine king&mdash;was put to
death; but in historical times it seems that, as a rule, the
human god&mdash;the Saturn, Zoganes, Tammuz, or whatever he
was called&mdash;enjoyed his divine privileges, and discharged
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
his divine duties only for a short part of the year. This
curtailment of his reign on earth was probably introduced
at the time when the old hereditary divinities or deified
kings contrived to shift the most painful part of their
duties to a substitute, whether that substitute was a son or
a slave or a malefactor. Having to die as a king, it was
necessary that the substitute should also live as a king for
a season; but the real monarch would naturally restrict
within the narrowest limits both of time and of power a
reign which, so long as it lasted, necessarily encroached
upon and indeed superseded his own.<note place='foot'>The five days' duration of the
mock king's reign may possibly have
been an intercalary period introduced,
as in ancient Egypt and Mexico, for
the purpose of equalizing a year of
360 days (twelve months of 30 days
each) to a solar year reckoned at 365
days. See above, pp. 339 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> What became of
the divine king's female partner, the human goddess who
shared his bed and transmitted his beneficent energies to
the rest of nature, we cannot say. So far as I am aware,
there is little or no evidence that she like him suffered
death when her primary function was discharged.<note place='foot'>However, the legend that Semiramis
burned herself on a pyre in
Babylon for grief at the loss of a
favourite horse (Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 243;
compare Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 155)
may perhaps point to an old custom
of compelling the human representative
of the goddess to perish in the flames.
We have seen (above, p. <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>) that one
of the lovers of Ishtar had the form of
a horse. Hence the legend recorded
by Hyginus is a fresh link in the chain
of evidence which binds Semiramis to
Ishtar.</note> The
nature of maternity suggests an obvious reason for sparing
her a little longer, till that mysterious law, which links
together woman's life with the changing aspects of the
nightly sky, had been fulfilled by the birth of an infant
god, who should in his turn, reared perhaps by her tender
care, grow up to live and die for the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. Conclusion.'/>
<head>§ 6. Conclusion.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wide
prevalence
of festivals
like the
Saturnalia
in antiquity. Such
festivals
seem to
have been
held by
agricultural
communities
for the
good of the
crops, and
at them
the king
or his
substitute
appears
to have
personated
the god of
fertility,
and to
have been
put to
death in
that character
in
order to
ensure that
the god
should rise
from the
dead with
renewed
youth and
vigour.</note>
We may now sum up the general results of the enquiry
which we have pursued in the present chapter. We have
found evidence that festivals of the type of the Saturnalia,
characterized by an inversion of social ranks and the sacrifice
of a man in the character of a god, were at one time held
all over the ancient world from Italy to Babylon. Such
festivals seem to date from an early age in the history of
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
agriculture, when people lived in small communities, each
presided over by a sacred or divine king, whose primary
duty was to secure the orderly succession of the seasons,
the fertility of the earth, and the fecundity both of cattle
and of women. Associated with him was his wife or other
female consort, with whom he performed some of the
necessary ceremonies, and who therefore shared his divine
character. Originally his term of office appears to have
been limited to a year, on the conclusion of which he was
put to death; but in time he contrived by force or craft to
extend his reign and sometimes to procure a substitute, who
after a short and more or less nominal tenure of the crown
was slain in his stead. At first the substitute for the divine
father was probably the divine son, but afterwards this rule
was no longer insisted on, and still later the growth of a
humane feeling demanded that the victim should always be
a condemned criminal. In this advanced stage of degeneration
it is no wonder if the light of divinity suffered eclipse,
and many should fail to detect the god in the malefactor.
Yet the downward career of fallen deity does not stop here;
even a criminal comes to be thought too good to personate a
god on the gallows or in the fire; and then there is nothing
left but to make up a more or less grotesque effigy, and so
to hang, burn, or otherwise destroy the god in the person of
this sorry representative. By this time the original meaning
of the ceremony may be so completely forgotten that the
puppet is supposed to represent some historical personage,
who earned the hatred and contempt of his fellows in his
life, and whose memory has ever since been held up to
eternal execration by the annual destruction of his effigy.
The figures of Haman, of the Carnival, and of Winter or
Death which are or used to be annually destroyed in spring
by Jews, Catholics, and the peasants of Central Europe
respectively, appear to be all lineal descendants of those
human incarnations of the powers of nature whose life and
death were deemed essential to the welfare of mankind. But
of the three the only one which has preserved a clear trace
of its original meaning is the effigy of Winter or Death. In
the others the ancient significance of the custom as a magical
ceremony designed to direct the course of nature has been
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
almost wholly obscured by a thick aftergrowth of legend and
myth. The cause of this distinction is that, whereas the
practice of destroying an effigy of Winter or Death has
been handed down from time immemorial through generations
of simple peasants, the festivals of Purim and the
Carnival, as well as their Babylonian and Italian prototypes,
the Sacaea and the Saturnalia, were for centuries domesticated
in cities, where they were necessarily exposed to those
thousand transforming and disintegrating currents of speculation
and enquiry, of priestcraft and policy, which roll their
turbid waters through the busy haunts of men, but leave
undefiled the limpid springs of mythic fancy in the country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
festivals
point to a
remarkable
homogeneity
of
civilization
over a
great part
of the Old
World in
antiquity.</note>
If there is any truth in the analysis of the Saturnalia
and kindred festivals which I have now brought to a close,
it seems to point to a remarkable homogeneity of civilization
throughout Southern Europe and Western Asia in prehistoric
times. How far such homogeneity of civilization may be
taken as evidence of homogeneity of race is a question for
the ethnologist; it does not concern us here. But without
discussing it, I may remind the reader that in the far east of
Asia we have met with temporary kings whose magical
functions and intimate relation to agriculture stand out in
the clearest light;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> while India furnishes examples of kings
who have regularly been obliged to sacrifice themselves at
the end of a term of years.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> All these things appear to
hang together; all of them may, perhaps, be regarded as
the shattered remnants of a uniform zone of religion and
society which at a remote era belted the Old World from
the Mediterranean to the Pacific. Whether that was so or
not, I may at least claim to have made it probable that if
the King of the Wood at Aricia lived and died as an incarnation
of a sylvan deity, the functions he thus discharged
were by no means singular, and that for the nearest parallel
to them we need not go beyond the bounds of Italy, where
the divine king Saturn&mdash;the god of the sown and sprouting
seed&mdash;was annually slain in the person of a human representative
at his ancient festival of the Saturnalia.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
periodical
sacrifice of
deified men
for the
sake of
maintaining
the
course of
nature
perhaps
helps to
explain
traditions
which
represent
the world
or parts
of it as
created
out of the
bodies of
gods. The
Brahmanical
theory
of the
perpetual
renewal
of the
creation in
the daily
sacrifice.</note>
It is possible that such sacrifices of deified men, performed
for the salvation of the world, may have helped to
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
beget the notion that the universe or some part of it
was originally created out of the bodies of gods offered
up in sacrifice. Certainly it is curious that notions of this
sort meet us precisely in parts of the world where such
sacrifices appear to have been regularly accomplished. Thus
in ancient Mexico, where the sacrifice of human beings in
the character of gods formed a conspicuous feature of the
national religion, it is said that in the beginning, when as yet
the light of day was not, the gods created the sun to illumine
the earth by voluntarily burning themselves in the fire, leaping
one after the other into the flames of a great furnace.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 478-480. Compare
E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische Studien</hi>, ii.
(Berlin, 1899) p. 117.</note>
Again, in the Babylonian Genesis the great god Bel created
the world by cleaving the female monster Tiamat in twain
and using the severed halves of her body to form the heaven
and the earth. Afterwards, perceiving that the earth was
waste and void, he obligingly ordered one of the gods to
cut off his, the Creator's, head, and with the flowing blood
mixed with clay he kneaded a paste out of which he moulded
men and animals.<note place='foot'>Berosus, quoted by Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Chronicorum liber prior</hi>, ed. A. Schoene
(Berlin, 1875), coll. 14-18; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</hi>,
ed. C. Muller, ii. 497 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P. Jensen,
<hi rend='italic'>Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und
Epen</hi> (Berlin, 1900), pp. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L.
W. King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian Religion and
Mythology</hi> (London, 1899), pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria</hi> (Boston, U.S.A., 1898),
pp. 408 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Zimmern, in E.
Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften und das
Alte Testament</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1902), pp.
488 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. J. Lagrange, <hi rend='italic'>Études sur
les Religions Sémitiques</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Paris, 1905),
pp. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. W. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform
Parallels to the Old Testament</hi>
(Oxford, preface dated 1911), pp.
31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 36. In the Hebrew account
of the creation (Genesis i. 2) <q>the deep</q>
(תהום <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>tĕhom</foreign>) is a reminiscence of the
Babylonian mythical monster Tiamat.</note> Similarly in a hymn of the Rig
Veda we read how the gods created the world out of the
dismembered body of the great primordial giant Purushu.
The sky was made out of his head, the earth out of his
feet, the sun out of his eye, and the moon out of his
mind; animals and men were also engendered from his
dripping fat or his limbs, and the great gods Indra and Agni
sprang from his mouth.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hymns of the Rig Veda</hi>, x. 90
(vol. iv. pp. 289-293 of R. T. H.
Griffith's translation, Benares, 1889-1892).
Compare A. A. Macdonell,
<hi rend='italic'>Vedic Mythology</hi> (Strasburg, 1897), pp.
12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The crude, nay savage, account of
creation thus set forth by the poet was retained by the Brahman
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
doctors of a later age and refined by them into a subtle
theory of sacrifice in general. According to them the world
was not only created in the beginning by the sacrifice of
the creator Prajapati, the Lord of Creatures; to this day it is
renewed and preserved solely by a repetition of that mystic
sacrifice in the daily sacrificial ritual celebrated by the
Brahmans. Every day the body of the Creator and Saviour
is broken anew, and every day it is pieced together for the
restoration and conservation of a universe which otherwise
must dissolve and be shattered into fragments. Thus is the
world continually created afresh by the self-sacrifice of the
deity; and, wonderful to relate, the priest who offers the
sacrifice identifies himself with the Creator, and so by the
very act of sacrificing renews the universe and keeps up
uninterrupted the revolution of time and matter. All things
depend on his beneficent, nay divine activity, from the
heaven above to the earth beneath, from the greatest god to
the meanest worm, from the sun and moon to the humblest
blade of grass and the minutest particle of dust. Happily
this grandiose theory of sacrifice as a process essential to the
salvation of the world does not oblige the priest to imitate
his glorious prototype by dismembering his own body and
shedding his blood on the altar; on the contrary a comfortable
corollary deduced from it holds out to him the pleasing
prospect of living for the unspeakable benefit of society to a
good old age, indeed of stretching out the brief span of
human existence to a full hundred years.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha Brâhmana</hi>, translated
by Julius Eggeling, Part iv.
(Oxford, 1897) pp. xiv.-xxiv. (<hi rend='italic'>The
Sacred Books of the East</hi>, vol. xliii.).
Compare Sylvain Lévi, <hi rend='italic'>La doctrine du
sacrifice dans les Brâhmanas</hi> (Paris,
1898), pp. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Well is it, not
only for the priest but for mankind, when with the slow
progress of civilization and humanity the hard facts of a
cruel ritual have thus been softened and diluted into the
nebulous abstractions of a mystical theology.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note. The Crucifixion Of Christ.<note place='foot'>[The following Note formed part
of the text in the Second Edition of
<hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi> (London, 1900),
vol. iii. pp. 186-198. The hypothesis
which it sets forth has not been confirmed
by subsequent research, and is
admittedly in a high degree speculative
and uncertain. Hence I have removed
it from the text but preserved
it as an appendix on the chance that,
under a pile of conjectures, it contains
some grains of truth which may ultimately
contribute to a solution of the
problem. As my views on this subject
appear to have been strangely
misunderstood, I desire to point out
explicitly that my theory assumes the
historical reality of Jesus of Nazareth
as a great religious and moral teacher,
who founded Christianity and was
crucified at Jerusalem under the
governorship of Pontius Pilate. The
testimony of the Gospels, confirmed by
the hostile evidence of Tacitus (<hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi>,
xv. 44) and the younger Pliny (<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi>
x. 96), appears amply sufficient to
establish these facts to the satisfaction
of all unprejudiced enquirers. It is
only the details of the life and death
of Christ that remain, and will probably
always remain, shrouded in the
mists of uncertainty. The doubts
which have been cast on the historical
reality of Jesus are in my judgment
unworthy of serious attention. Quite
apart from the positive evidence of
history and tradition, the origin of a
great religious and moral reform is inexplicable
without the personal existence
of a great reformer. To dissolve
the founder of Christianity into a myth,
as some would do, is hardly less
absurd than it would be to do the
same for Mohammed, Luther, and
Calvin. Such dissolving views are for
the most part the dreams of students
who know the great world chiefly
through its pale reflection in books.
These extravagances of scepticism
have been well exposed by Professor
C. F. Lehmann-Haupt in
his <hi rend='italic'>Israel, seine Entwicklung im
Rahmen der Weltgeschichte</hi> (Tübingen,
1911), pp. 275-285. In reprinting
the statement of my theory I have
added a few notes, which are distinguished
by being enclosed in square
brackets.]</note></head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
mockery
of Christ
compared
to the
mockery
of the
King of the
Saturnalia.</note>
An eminent scholar has recently pointed out the remarkable resemblance
between the treatment of Christ by the Roman soldiers
at Jerusalem and the treatment of the mock king of the Saturnalia
by the Roman soldiers at Durostorum; and he would explain the
similarity by supposing that the soldiers ridiculed the claims of
Christ to a divine kingdom by arraying him in the familiar garb of
old King Saturn, whose quaint person figured so prominently at the
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
winter revels.<note place='foot'>P. Wendland, <q>Jesus als Saturnalien-König,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Hermes</hi>, xxxiii. (1898)
pp. 175-179.</note> Even if the theory should prove to be right, we can
hardly suppose that Christ played the part of the regular Saturn of
the year, since at the beginning of our era the Saturnalia fell at midwinter,
whereas Christ was crucified at the Passover in spring.
There is, indeed, as I have pointed out, some reason to think that
when the Roman year began in March the Saturnalia was held in
spring, and that in remote districts the festival always continued to
be celebrated at the ancient date. If the Roman garrison of Jerusalem
conformed to the old fashion in this respect, it seems not
quite impossible that their celebration of the Saturnalia may have
coincided with the Passover; and that thus Christ, as a condemned
criminal, may have been given up to them to make sport with as
the Saturn of the year. But on the other hand it is rather unlikely
that the officers, as representatives of the State, would have allowed
their men to hold the festival at any but the official date; even in
the distant town of Durostorum we saw that the Roman soldiers
celebrated the Saturnalia in December. Thus if the legionaries at
Jerusalem really intended to mock Christ by treating him like the
burlesque king of the Saturnalia, they probably did so only by way
of a jest which was in more senses than one unseasonable.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
mockery
of Christ
compared
to the
mockery
of the
King of
the Sacaea.</note>
But closely as the passion of Christ resembles the treatment of
the mock king of the Saturnalia, it resembles still more closely the
treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea.<note place='foot'>The resemblance had struck me
when I wrote this book originally
[1889-1890], but as I could not
definitely explain it I preferred to
leave it unnoticed. [The first in
recent years to call attention to the
resemblance seems to have been Mr.
W. R. Paton, who further conjectured
that the crucifixion of Christ between
two malefactors was not accidental,
but had a ritual significance <q>as
an expiatory sacrifice to a triple
god.</q> See F. C. Conybeare, <hi rend='italic'>The
Apology and Acts of Apollonius and
other Monuments of Early Christianity</hi>
(London, 1894), pp. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
W. R. Paton, <q>Die Kreuzigung
Jesu,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche
Wissenschaft</hi>, ii. (1901) pp.
339-341. The grounds for the conjecture
are somewhat slender. It is
true that a Persian martyr, S. Hiztibouzit,
is said to have been crucified
between two malefactors on a hill top,
opposite the sun (F. C. Conybeare, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 270), but the narrator of the
martyrdom gives no hint of any sacred
significance attaching to the triple
crucifixion.]</note> The description of the
mockery by St. Matthew is the fullest. It runs thus: <q>Then released
he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus,
he delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the governor
took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole
band of soldiers. And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet
robe. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it
upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the
knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
head. And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe
off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away
to crucify him.</q><note place='foot'>Matthew xxvii. 26-31. Mark's
description (xv. 15-20) is nearly
identical.</note> Compare with this the treatment of the mock
king of the Sacaea, as it is described by Dio Chrysostom: <q>They
take one of the prisoners condemned to death and seat him upon
the king's throne, and give him the king's raiment, and let him lord
it and drink and run riot and use the king's concubines during
these days, and no man prevents him from doing just what he likes.
But afterwards they strip and scourge and crucify him.</q><note place='foot'>Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> iv. vol. i. p.
76 ed. L. Dindorf. As I have already
mentioned, the Greek word which
describes the execution (ἐκρέμασαν)
leaves it uncertain whether the man
was crucified or hanged.</note> Now it
is quite possible that this remarkable resemblance is after all a mere
coincidence, and that Christ was executed in the ordinary way as a
common malefactor; but on the other hand there are so many
scattered hints and indications of something unusual, so many
broken lines seemingly converging towards the cross on Calvary,
that it is worth while to follow them up and see where they lead us.
In attempting to draw these fragmentary data together, to bridge
the chasms, and to restore the shattered whole, we must beware of
mistaking hypothesis for the facts which it only professes to cement;
yet even if our hypothesis should be thought to bear a somewhat
undue proportion to the facts, the excess may perhaps be overlooked
in consideration of the obscurity and the importance of the
enquiry.

<note place='margin'>At Purim
the Jews
may have
annually
put to
death a
man in the
character
of Haman,
and Christ
may have
perished
in that
character.
But the
Passover,
at which
Christ was
crucified,
fell a
month after
Purim.
Perhaps
the annual
Haman,
like the
annual
Saturn, was
allowed a
month's
license before
being
put to
death.</note>
We have seen reason to think that the Jewish festival of Purim
is a continuation, under a changed name, of the Babylonian Sacaea,
and that in celebrating it by the destruction of an effigy of Haman
the modern Jews have kept up a reminiscence of the ancient
custom of crucifying or hanging a man in the character of a god at
the festival. Is it not possible that at an earlier time they may, like
the Babylonians themselves, have regularly compelled a condemned
criminal to play the tragic part, and that Christ thus perished in
the character of Haman? The resemblance between the hanged
Haman and the crucified Christ struck the early Christians themselves;
and whenever the Jews destroyed an effigy of Haman they
were accused by their Christian neighbours of deriding the most
sacred mystery of the new faith.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</note> It is probable that on this
painful subject the Christians were too sensitive; remembering the
manner of their Founder's death it was natural that they should
wince at any pointed allusion to a cross, a gallows, or a public
execution, even when the shaft was not aimed at them. An objection
to supposing that Christ died as the Haman of the year is that
according to the Gospel narrative the crucifixion occurred at the
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
Passover, on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, whereas the
feast of Purim, at which the hanging of Haman would naturally
take place, fell exactly a month earlier, namely, on the fourteenth
day of the month Adar. I have no wish to blink or extenuate the
serious nature of the difficulty arising from this discrepancy of dates,
but I would suggest some considerations which may make us
hesitate to decide that the discrepancy is fatal. In the first place,
it is possible, though perhaps not probable, that Christian tradition
shifted the date of the crucifixion by a month in order to make the
great sacrifice of the Lamb of God coincide with that annual sacrifice
of the Passover lamb which in the belief of pious hearts had so
long foreshadowed it and was thenceforth to cease.<note place='foot'>[The extreme improbability involved
in the suggested transference of
the date of the Crucifixion is rightly
emphasized by my colleague and friend
Professor C. F. Lehmann-Haupt in
some observations and criticisms with
which he has favoured me. He
writes: <q>I regard it as out of the
question that <q>Christian tradition
shifted the date of the Crucifixion by a
month.</q> You yourself regard it as
improbable; but in my opinion it is
impossible. All that we hear of the
Passion is only explicable by the Passover
festival and by the circumstance
that at that time every believing Jew
had to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
Without the background of the festival
all that we know of the Crucifixion
and of what led up to it is totally unintelligible.</q>]</note> Instances of
gentle pressure brought to bear, for purposes of edification, on
stubborn facts are perhaps not wholly unknown in the annals of religion.
But the express testimony of history is never to be lightly
set aside; and in the investigation of its problems a solution which
assumes the veracity and accuracy of the historian is, on an even
balance of probabilities, always to be preferred to one which impugns
them both. Now in the present case we have seen reason
to think that the Babylonian New Year festival, of which Purim was
a continuation, did fall in Nisan at or near the time of the Passover,
and that when the Jews borrowed the festival they altered the date
from Nisan to Adar in order to prevent the new feast from clashing
with the old Passover. A reminiscence of the original date of
Purim perhaps survives, as I have already pointed out, in the statement
in the book of Esther that Haman caused <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>pur</foreign> or lots to be
cast before him from the month of Nisan onward.<note place='foot'>Esther iii. 7.</note> It thus seems
not impossible that occasionally, for some special reason, the Jews
should have celebrated the feast of Purim, or at least the death of
Haman, at or about the time of the Passover. But there is another
possibility which, remote and fanciful as it may appear, deserves at
least to be mentioned. The mock king of the Saturnalia, whose
resemblance to the dying Christ was first pointed out by Mr. Wendland,
was allowed a period of license of thirty days before he was
put to death. If we could suppose that in like manner the Jews
spared the human representative of Haman for one month from
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
Purim, the date of his execution would fall exactly on the Passover.
Which, if any, of these conjectural solutions of the difficulty is the
true one, I will not undertake to say. I am fully conscious of the
doubt and uncertainty that hang round the whole subject; and if
in this and what follows I throw out some hints and suggestions, it
is more in the hope of stimulating and directing further enquiry
than with any expectation of reaching definite conclusions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The part
taken by
the soldiers
in the
mockery
of Christ.</note>
It may be objected that the mockery of Christ was done, not by
the Jews, but by the Roman soldiers, who knew and cared nothing
about Haman; how then can we suppose that the purple or scarlet
robe, the sceptre of reed, and the crown of thorns, which the
soldiers thrust upon Christ, were the regular insignia of the Haman
of the year? To this we may reply, in the first place, that even if
the legions stationed in Syria were not recruited in the country,
they may have contracted some of the native superstitions and have
fallen in with the local customs. This is not an idle conjecture.
We know that the third legion during its stay in Syria learned the
Syrian custom of saluting the rising sun, and that this formal salute,
performed by the whole regiment as one man at a critical moment
of the great battle of Bedriacum, actually helped to turn the scale
when the fortune of empire hung trembling in the balance.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> iii. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, compared with ii. 74.</note>
But it is not necessary to suppose that the garrison of Jerusalem
really shared the beliefs and prejudices of the mob whom they
overawed; soldiers everywhere are ready to go with a crowd bent
on sport, without asking any curious questions as to the history or
quality of the entertainment, and we should probably do the
humanity of Roman soldiers too much honour if we imagined that
they would be deterred by any qualm of conscience from joining in
the pastime, which is still so popular, of baiting a Jew to death.
But in the second place it should be observed that, according to
one of the Evangelists, it was not the soldiers of Pilate who mocked
Jesus, but the soldiers of Herod,<note place='foot'>Luke xxiii. 11.</note> and we may fairly assume that
Herod's guards were Jews.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The theory
that Christ
died, not
as a malefactor,
but
in the
character
of Haman
helps to
explain
both
Pilate's
reluctance
to put him
to death,
and it also
explains
the remarkable
superscription
on the
cross.</note>
The hypothesis that the crucifixion with all its cruel mockery
was not a punishment specially devised for Christ, but was merely
the fate that annually befell the malefactor who played Haman,
appears to go some way towards relieving the Gospel narrative of
certain difficulties which otherwise beset it. If, as we read in the
Gospels, Pilate was really anxious to save the innocent man whose
fine bearing seems to have struck him, what was to hinder him
from doing so? He had the power of life and death; why should
he not have exercised it on the side of mercy, if his own
judgment inclined that way? His reluctant acquiescence in the
importunate demand of the rabble becomes easier to understand
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
if we assume that custom obliged him annually at this season to
give up to them a prisoner on whom they might play their cruel
pranks. On this assumption Pilate had no power to prevent the
sacrifice; the most he could do was to choose the victim.
</p>

<p>
Again, consider the remarkable statement of the Evangelists
that Pilate set up over the cross a superscription stating that the
man who hung on it was king of the Jews.<note place='foot'>Matthew xxvii. 37; Mark xv. 26;
Luke xxiii. 38; John xix. 19.</note> Is it likely that in the
reign of Tiberius a Roman governor, with the fear of the jealous
and suspicious old emperor before his eyes, would have ventured,
even in mockery, to blazon forth a seditious claim of this sort unless
it were the regular formula employed on such occasions, recognized
by custom, and therefore not liable to be misconstrued into treason
by the malignity of informers and the fears of a tyrant?
</p>

<p>
But if the tragedy of the ill-fated aspirant after royal honours
was annually enacted at Jerusalem by a prisoner who perished on
the cross, it becomes probable that the part of his successful rival
was also played by another actor who paraded in the same kingly
trappings but did not share the same fate. If Jesus was the Haman
of the year, where was the Mordecai? Perhaps we may find him
in Barabbas.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
part of
Mordecai
in the
annual
drama in
which
Christ died
as Haman
may have
been
played by
Barabbas. The
mock King
Carabas
in Egypt.</note>
We are told by the Evangelists that at the feast which witnessed
the crucifixion of Christ it was the custom for the Roman governor
to release one prisoner, whomsoever the people desired, and that
Pilate, convinced of the innocence of Jesus, attempted to persuade
the multitude to choose him as the man who should go free. But,
hounded on by the priests and elders who had marked out Jesus
for destruction, the rabble would not hear of this, and clamoured
for the blood of Jesus, while they demanded the release of a certain
miscreant, by name Barabbas, who lay in gaol for murder and
sedition. Accordingly Pilate had to give way: Christ was crucified
and Barabbas set at liberty.<note place='foot'>Matthew xxvii. 15-26; Mark xv.
6-15; Luke xxiii. 16-25; John xviii.
38-40.</note> Now what, we may ask, was the
reason for setting free a prisoner at this festival? In the absence
of positive information, we may conjecture that the gaol-bird whose
cage was thrown open at this time had to purchase his freedom by
performing some service from which decent people would shrink.
Such a service may very well have been that of going about the
streets, rigged out in tawdry splendour with a tinsel crown on his
head and a sham sceptre in his hand, preceded and followed by all
the tag-rag and bobtail of the town hooting, jeering, and breaking
coarse jests at his expense, while some pretended to salaam his
mock majesty, and others belaboured the donkey on which he rode.
It was in this fashion, probably, that in Persia the beardless and
one-eyed man made his undignified progress through the town, to
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
the delight of ragamuffins and the terror of shopkeepers, whose
goods he unceremoniously confiscated if they did not hasten to lay
their peace-offerings at his feet. So, perhaps, the ruffian Barabbas,
when his irons were knocked off and the prison door had grated on
its hinges to let him forth, tasted the first sweets of liberty in this
public manner, even if he was not suffered, like his one-eyed
brother, to make raids with impunity on the stalls of the merchants
and the tables of the money-changers. A curious confirmation of
this conjecture is supplied by a passage in the writings of Philo the
Jew, who lived at Alexandria in the time of Christ. He tells us
that when Agrippa, the grandson of Herod, had received the crown
of Judaea from Caligula at Rome, the new king passed through
Alexandria on his way to his own country. The disorderly populace
of that great city, animated by a hearty dislike of his nation,
seized the opportunity of venting their spite by publicly defaming
and ridiculing the Jewish monarch. Among other things they laid
hold of a certain harmless lunatic named Carabas, who used to
roam the streets stark naked, the butt and laughing-stock of urchins
and idlers. This poor wretch they set up in a public place, clapped
a paper crown on his head, thrust a broken reed into his hand by
way of a sceptre, and having huddled a mat instead of a royal robe
about his naked body, and surrounded him with a guard of bludgeon-men,
they did obeisance to him as to a king and made a show of
taking his opinion on questions of law and policy. To point the
jest unmistakably at the Syrian king Agrippa, the bystanders raised
cries of <q>Marin! Marin!</q> which they understood to be the Syrian
word for <q>lord.</q><note place='foot'>Philo Judaeus, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus Flaccum</hi>,
vol. ii. pp. 520-523 ed. Th. Mangey
(London, 1742). The first to call
attention to this passage was Mr.
P. Wendland (<q>Jesus als Saturnalien-König,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Hermes</hi>, xxxiii. (1898)
pp. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). [Mar-na, <q>Our
Lord,</q> was the title of a Philistine
deity worshipped at Gaza and elsewhere.
See C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
der Religion im Altertum</hi> (Gotha,
1896-1903), i. 258. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew
and English Lexicon</hi>, edited by F.
Brown, S. R. Driver, and Ch. A.
Briggs (Oxford, 1906), p. 1101.]</note> This mockery of the Jewish king closely
resembles the mockery of Christ; and the joke, such as it was,
would receive a keener edge if we could suppose that the riff-raff
of Alexandria were familiar with the Jewish practice of setting up
a sham king on certain occasions, and that they meant by implication
to ridicule the real King Agrippa by comparing him to his
holiday counterfeit. May we go a step further and conjecture that
one at least of the titles of the mock king of the Jews was regularly
Barabbas? The poor imbecile who masqueraded in a paper crown
at Alexandria was probably a Jew, otherwise the jest would have
lost much of its point; and his name, according to the Greek
manuscripts of Philo, was Carabas. But Carabas is meaningless in
Hebrew, whereas Barabbas is a regularly formed Hebrew word
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
meaning <q>Son of the Father.</q> The palaeographic difference
between the two forms is slight, and perhaps we shall hardly be
deemed very rash if we conjecture that in the passage in question
Philo himself wrote Barabbas, which a Greek copyist, ignorant of
Hebrew, afterwards corrupted into Carabas. If this were granted,
we should still have to assume that both Philo and the authors of
the Gospels fell into the mistake of treating as the name of an
individual what in fact was a title of office.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hypothesis
that every
spring at
Purim or
Passover
the Jews
paraded
two
prisoners
in the
characters
of Haman
and Mordecai,
of
whom one
was put to
death and
the other
released.</note>
Thus the hypothesis which, with great diffidence, I would put
forward for consideration is this. It was customary, we may suppose,
with the Jews at Purim, or perhaps occasionally at Passover, to
employ two prisoners to act the parts respectively of Haman and
Mordecai in the passion-play which formed a central feature of the
festival. Both men paraded for a short time in the insignia of
royalty, but their fates were different; for while at the end of the
performance the one who played Haman was hanged or crucified,
the one who personated Mordecai and bore in popular parlance the
title of Barabbas was allowed to go free. Pilate, perceiving the
trumpery nature of the charges brought against Jesus, tried to
persuade the Jews to let him play the part of Barabbas, which
would have saved his life; but the merciful attempt failed and Jesus
perished on the cross in the character of Haman. The description
of his last triumphal ride into Jerusalem reads almost like an echo
of that brilliant progress through the streets of Susa which Haman
aspired to and Mordecai accomplished; and the account of the
raid which he immediately afterwards made upon the stalls of the
hucksters and money-changers in the temple, may raise a question
whether we have not here a trace of those arbitrary rights over
property which it has been customary on such occasions to accord
to the temporary king.<note place='foot'>Matthew xxi. 1-13; Mark xi.
1-17; Luke xix. 28-46; John xii.
12-15. [As to the license accorded to
temporary kings, see <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>,
pp. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq</hi>.]</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Barabbas
(<q>Son
of the
Father</q>)
may have
been the
regular
title of the
prisoner
who was
released
in the
character
of Mordecai.</note>
If it be asked why one of these temporary kings should bear
the remarkable title of Barabbas or <q>Son of the Father,</q> I can
only surmise that the title may perhaps be a relic of the time when
the real king, the deified man, used to redeem his own life by
deputing his son to reign for a short time and to die in his stead.
We have seen that the custom of sacrificing the son for the father
was common, if not universal, among Semitic peoples; and if we
are right in our interpretation of the Passover, that festival&mdash;the
traditional date of the crucifixion&mdash;was the very season when the
dreadful sacrifice of the first-born was consummated.<note place='foot'>[<hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>]</note> Hence
Barabbas or the <q>Son of the Father</q> would be a natural enough
title for the man or child who reigned and died as a substitute for
his royal sire. Even in later times, when the father provided a less
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
precious substitute than his own offspring, it would be quite in
accordance with the formal conservatism of religion that the old
title should be retained after it had ceased to be appropriate;
indeed the efficacy of the sacrifice might be thought to require and
justify the pious fiction that the substitute was the very son of that
divine father who should have died, but who preferred to live, for
the good of his people. If in the time of Christ, as I have conjectured,
the title of Barabbas or Son of the Father was bestowed
on the Mordecai, the mock king who lived, rather than on the
Haman, the mock king who died at the festival, this distinction
can hardly have been original; for at first, we may suppose, the
same man served in both capacities at different times, as the
Mordecai of one year and the Haman of the next. The two
characters, as I have attempted to shew, are probably nothing but
two different aspects of the same deity considered at one time as
dead and at another as risen; hence the human being who personated
the risen god would in due time, after he had enjoyed his
divine honours for a season, act the dead god by dying in good
earnest in his own person; for it would be unreasonable to expect
of the ordinary man-god that he should play the two parts in the
reverse order by dying first and coming to life afterwards. In both
parts the substitute would still be, whether in sober fact or in pious
fiction, the Barabbas or Son of that divine Father who generously
gave his own son to die for the world.<note place='foot'>[In favour of the theory in the text,
which supposes that in the tragic drama
of the crucifixion Jesus and Barabbas
played parts which were the complements,
if not the duplicates, of each
other, it might, as M. Salomon Reinach
has pointed out, be alleged that in the
Armenian and old Syriac versions of
Matthew xxvii. 16 and 17, as well as in
some Greek cursive manuscripts, the
name of the prisoner whom Pilate
proposed to release is given as Jesus
Barabbas, a reading which was also
known to Origen and was not absolutely
rejected by him. See <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Biblica</hi> (London, 1899-1903),
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Barabbas,</q> vol. i. col. 477;
<hi rend='italic'>Evangelion da-Mepharreshe</hi>, edited
by F. C. Burkitt (Cambridge, 1904),
i. 165, ii. 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the latter
passage Prof. Burkitt argues that
Jesus Barabbas was probably the
original reading in the Greek text,
though the name Jesus is omitted in
nearly all our existing manuscripts.
Compare S. Reinach, <q>Le roi supplicié,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Cultes, Mythes, et Religions</hi>,
i. (Paris, 1905) pp. 339 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The theory
that Christ
was put
to death,
not as a
criminal,
but as the
annual
representative
of a
god, whose
counterparts
were
well known
all over
Western
Asia, may
help to
explain
his early
deification
and the
rapid
spread of
his worship.</note>
To conclude this speculation, into which I have perhaps been
led by the interest and importance of the subject somewhat deeper
than the evidence warrants, I venture to urge in its favour that it
seems to shed fresh light on some of the causes which contributed
to the remarkably rapid diffusion of Christianity in Asia Minor.
We know from a famous letter of the younger Pliny addressed to
the Emperor Trajan in the year 112 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> that by the beginning of
our era, less than a hundred years after the Founder's death,
Christianity had made such strides in Bithynia and Pontus that not
only cities but villages and rural districts were affected by it, and
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
that multitudes of both sexes and of every age and every rank
professed its tenets; indeed things had gone so far that the temples
were almost deserted, the sacred rites of the public religion discontinued,
and hardly a purchaser could be found for the sacrificial
victims.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> x. 96. The province
which Pliny governed was known
officially as Bithynia and Pontus, and
extended from the river Rhyndacos on
the west to beyond Amisus on the east.
See Professor [Sir] W. M. Ramsay,
<hi rend='italic'>The Church in the Roman Empire</hi>
(London, 1893), p. 224. Professor
Ramsay is of opinion <q>that the description
of the great power acquired
by the new religion in the province
applies to Eastern Pontus at least.</q>
The chief religious centre of this district
appears to have been the great
sanctuary of Anaitis or Semiramis at
Zela, to which I have already had
occasion to call the reader's attention.
Strabo tells us (xii. 3. 37) that all the
people of Pontus took their most solemn
oaths at this shrine. In the same district
there was another very popular
sanctuary of a similar type at Comana,
where the worship of a native
goddess called Ma was carried on by a
host of sacred harlots and by a high
priest, who wore a diadem and was
second only to the king in rank. At
the festivals of the goddess crowds of
men and women flocked into Comana
from all the region round about, from
the country as well as from the cities.
The luxury and debauchery of this holy
town suggest to Strabo a comparison
with the famous or rather infamous
Corinth. See Strabo, xii. 3. 32 and 36,
compared with xii. 2. 3. Such were
some of the hot-beds in which the
seeds of Christianity first struck root.</note> It is obvious, therefore, that the new faith had elements
in it which appealed powerfully to the Asiatic mind. What
these elements were, the present investigation has perhaps to
some extent disclosed. We have seen that the conception of the
dying and risen god was no new one in these regions. All over
Western Asia from time immemorial the mournful death and happy
resurrection of a divine being appear to have been annually
celebrated with alternate rites of bitter lamentation and exultant
joy; and through the veil which mythic fancy has woven round
this tragic figure we can still detect the features of those great
yearly changes in earth and sky which, under all distinctions of race
and religion, must always touch the natural human heart with
alternate emotions of gladness and regret, because they exhibit on
the vastest scale open to our observation the mysterious struggle
between life and death. But man has not always been willing to
watch passively this momentous conflict; he has felt that he has
too great a stake in its issue to stand by with folded hands while it
is being fought out; he has taken sides against the forces of death
and decay&mdash;has flung into the trembling scale all the weight of his
puny person, and has exulted in his fancied strength when the
great balance has slowly inclined towards the side of life, little
knowing that for all his strenuous efforts he can as little stir that
balance by a hair's-breadth as can the primrose on a mossy bank in
spring or the dead leaf blown by the chilly breath of autumn.
Nowhere do these efforts, vain and pitiful, yet pathetic, appear to
have been made more persistently and systematically than in
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
Western Asia. In name they varied from place to place, but in
substance they were all alike. A man, whom the fond imagination
of his worshippers invested with the attributes of a god, gave
his life for the life of the world; after infusing from his own body
a fresh current of vital energy into the stagnant veins of nature, he
was cut off from among the living before his failing strength should
initiate a universal decay, and his place was taken by another who
played, like all his predecessors, the ever-recurring drama of the
divine resurrection and death. Such a drama, if our interpretation
of it is right, was the original story of Esther and Mordecai or, to
give them their older names, of Ishtar and Marduk. It was played
in Babylonia, and from Babylonia the returning captives brought it
to Judaea, where it was acted, rather as an historical than a
mythical piece, by players who, having to die in grim earnest on a
cross or gallows, were naturally drawn rather from the gaol than
the green-room. A chain of causes which, because we cannot
follow them, might in the loose language of daily life be called an
accident, determined that the part of the dying god in this annual
play should be thrust upon Jesus of Nazareth, whom the enemies
he had made in high places by his outspoken strictures were
resolved to put out of the way. They succeeded in ridding themselves
of the popular and troublesome preacher; but the very step
by which they fancied they had simultaneously stamped out his
revolutionary doctrines contributed more than anything else they
could have done to scatter them broadcast not only over Judaea
but over Asia; for it impressed upon what had been hitherto
mainly an ethical mission the character of a divine revelation
culminating in the passion and death of the incarnate Son of a
heavenly Father. In this form the story of the life and death of
Jesus exerted an influence which it could never have had if the
great teacher had died, as is commonly supposed, the death of a
vulgar malefactor. It shed round the cross on Calvary a halo of
divinity which multitudes saw and worshipped afar off; the blow
struck on Golgotha set a thousand expectant strings vibrating in
unison wherever men had heard the old, old story of the dying and
risen god. Every year, as another spring bloomed and another
autumn faded across the earth, the field had been ploughed and
sown and borne fruit of a kind till it received that seed which was
destined to spring up and overshadow the world. In the great
army of martyrs who in many ages and in many lands, not in Asia
only, have died a cruel death in the character of gods, the devout
Christian will doubtless discern types and forerunners of the coming
Saviour&mdash;stars that heralded in the morning sky the advent of the
Sun of Righteousness&mdash;earthen vessels wherein it pleased the
divine wisdom to set before hungering souls the bread of heaven.
The sceptic, on the other hand, with equal confidence, will reduce
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
Jesus of Nazareth to the level of a multitude of other victims of a
barbarous superstition, and will see in him no more than a moral
teacher, whom the fortunate accident of his execution invested with
the crown, not merely of a martyr, but of a god. The divergence
between these views is wide and deep. Which of them is the truer
and will in the end prevail? Time will decide the question of
prevalence, if not of truth. Yet we would fain believe that in this
and in all things the old maxim will hold good&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magna est veritas
et praevalebit.</foreign>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abbot of Folly in France, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Unreason in Scotland, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abdera, human scapegoats at, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abeghian, Manuk, quoted, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abjuration, form of, imposed on Jewish converts, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abonsam, an evil spirit on the Gold Coast, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abrahams, Israel, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abruzzi, Epiphany in the, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Absalom, his intercourse with his father's concubines, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Absrot, village of Bohemia, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abstinence as a charm to promote the growth of the seed, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abyssinian festival of Mascal or the Cross, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accusations of ritual murders brought against the Jews, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acilisena, in Armenia, the worship of Anaitis at, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acosta, J. de, quoted, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adaklu, Mount, in West Africa, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam and Eve, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adar, a Jewish month, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Adonis'/>
<l>Adonis at Alexandria, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual death and resurrection of, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his marriage with Ishtar (Aphrodite), <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Tammuz'>Tammuz</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Aphrodite, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aegisthus and Agamemnon, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aesculapius at Epidaurus, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, Northern, cairns in, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popular cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>South, dread of demons in, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tribes of, their expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>West, demons in, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agamemnon and Aegisthus, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agathias on Sandes, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agni, creation of the great god, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Agnus castus</foreign>, used in ceremony of beating, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricultural year, expulsions of demons timed to coincide with seasons of the, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agrippa, King of Judaea, his mockery at Alexandria, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ague, popular cures for, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Suffolk cure for, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahasuerus, King, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Hebrew equivalent of Xerxes, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ait Sadden, the, of Morocco, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Warain, a Berber tribe, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aitan, a goddess, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akamba, the, of British East Africa, riddles among the, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akikuyu of East Africa, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaska, the Esquimaux of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albania, expulsion of Kore on Easter Eve in, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albanian custom of beating men and beasts in March, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albanians of the Caucasus, their use of human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albîrûnî, Arab historian, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alençon, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aleutian Islands, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, Adonis at, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mockery of King Agrippa at, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandrian calendar, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfoors of Central Celebes, riddles among the, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Halmahera, their expulsion of the devil, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Algeria, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popular cure in, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Souls' College, Oxford, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Allallu</foreign> bird beloved by Ishtar, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allhallow Even, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almora, in Kumaon, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altars, bloodless, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambarvalia, the, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amboyna, belief in spirits in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disease-transference in, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ameretât, a Persian archangel, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>America, Indian tribes of North-Western, their masked dances, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amoor, Gilyaks of the, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amshaspands, Persian archangels, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amulets against demons, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>

<lg>
<l>Anacan, a month of the Gallic calendar, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anadates, at Zela, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anaitis, a Persian goddess, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestral spirits, propitiation of, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancona, sarcophagus of St. Dasius at, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andalusia, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, J. D., <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, Miss, of Barskimming, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andree-Eysn, Mrs., quoted, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals, transference of evil to, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guardian spirits of, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayed to, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances taught by, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imitated in dances, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Aninga</foreign>, aquatic plant in Brazil, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annam, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demon of cholera sent away on a raft from, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explanation of human mortality in, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthesteria, Athenian festival of the dead, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthesterion, an Athenian month, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antibes, Holy Innocents' Day at, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinmas, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiquity, human scapegoats in classical, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus, Marcus, plague in his reign, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ants, jealousy transferred to, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stinging people with, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anu, Babylonian god, visit of Ishtar to, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Apachitas</foreign>, heaps of stones, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aphrodite'/>
<l>Aphrodite and Adonis, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphrodite, the Oriental, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apis, sacred Egyptian bull, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo, temple of, at the Lover's Leap, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Artemis, cake with twelve knobs offered to, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>April, Siamese festival of the dead in, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arab cure for melancholy, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabia, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs, their custom as to widows, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom in regard to murder, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beat camels to deliver them from jinn, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Morocco, their custom at the Great Feast, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aracan, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances for the crops in, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Araucanians, the, of South America, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arawaks of British Guiana, their explanation of human mortality, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcadian custom of beating Pan's image, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arch to shut out plague, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through, as a cure, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arches made over paths at expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arctic regions, ceremonies at the reappearance of the sun in the, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ardennes, the King of the Bean in the, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Eve of Epiphany in the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argentina, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argus, the murder of, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aricia, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the priest of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>King of the Wood at, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arician grove, the, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; priesthood, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aries, the constellation, the sun in, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenia, the worship of Anaitis in, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenians, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arrows, invisible, of demons, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artaxerxes II., his promotion of the worship of Anaitis, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia laciniata</foreign>, garlands of, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aru Archipelago, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arval Brothers, the college of the, at Rome, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryan custom of counting by nights instead of days, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; languages, names for moon and month in, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; peoples, their correction of the lunar year, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryans of the Vedic age, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their calendar, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascalon, Derceto at, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension Day, cures on Eve of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of the devil on, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at Rouen on, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bells rung to make flax grow on, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash-tree in popular cure, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashantee, annual period of license in, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashtaroth, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashurbanapal and Sardanapalus, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia, Saturnalia in Western, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia Minor, use of human scapegoats by the Greeks of, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asongtata, an annual ceremony, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aspen in popular cure, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ass in cure for scorpion's bite, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>introduced into church at Festival of Fools, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>triumphal ride of a buffoon on an, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assam, the Kacharis of, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Lushais of, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Khasis of, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Nagas of, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Garos of, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assembly of the gods at the New Year in Babylon, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assimilation of human victims to trees, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyria, Ashurbanapal, king of, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian monarchs, conquerors of Babylonia, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>

<lg>
<l>Assyrians, the ancient, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Astarte'/>
<l>Astarte or Ishtar, a great Babylonian goddess, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Ishtar'>Ishtar</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Semiramis, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aston, W. G., quoted, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aswang, an evil spirit, exorcism of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenians, their use of human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their mode of reckoning a day, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their religious dramas, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, Cronus and the Cronia at, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atkhans, the, of Aleutian Islands, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atlas, Berbers of the Great, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atlatatonan, Mexican goddess of lepers, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman annually sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonement, the Jewish Day of, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attis and Cybele, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aubrey, John, on sin-eating, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aucas, the, of South America, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australia, Central, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, demons in, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of ghosts in, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austria, cure of warts in, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autumn, ceremony of the Esquimaux in late, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autun, the Festival of Fools at, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avestad in Sweden, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Axim, on the Gold Coast, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aymara Indians, their remedy for plague, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azazel, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aztecs, their custom of sacrificing human representatives of gods, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their five supplementary days, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azur, the month of March, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baal, human sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Babalawo</foreign>, priest, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babar Archipelago, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness expelled in a boat from the, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baboons sent by evil spirits, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baby, effigy of, used to fertilize women, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylon, festival of the Sacaea at, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonia, belief in demons in ancient, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Assyria, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the feast of Purim in, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian calendar, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchanalia, Purim a Jewish, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badagas, the, of the Neilgherry Hills, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badi, performer at a ceremony, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baffin Land, the Esquimaux of, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Baganda'/>
<l>Baganda, the, of Central Africa, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats among the, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahima, the, of the Uganda Protectorate, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baiga, aboriginal priest, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bali, belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>periodical expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ball, games of, played as a magical ceremony, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Normandy, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Balolo</foreign>, a sea-slug, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bamboo-rat sacrificed for riddance of evils, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bananas, mode of fertilizing, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the cause of human mortality, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangkok, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banishment of evil spirits, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banks' Islands, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banks' Islanders, their story of the origin of death, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banmanas of Senegambia, their custom at the death of an infant, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banquets in honour of the spirits of disease, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bantu tribes, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banyoro, the, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barabbas and Christ, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>Baraka</foreign>, blessed influence, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barat, a ceremony performed in Kumaon, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barito, river in Borneo, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baron, S., quoted, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barwan, river, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassa tribe, of the Cameroons, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassus, Roman officer, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutos, the, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Batchelor, Rev. J., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baton of Sinope, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battle, annual, among boys in Tumleo, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavaria, mode of reckoning the Twelve Days in, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Rhenish, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavarian cure for fever, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bawenda, the, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bean, the King of the, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Queen of the, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clan, the, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beans thrown about the house at the expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown about the house at the expulsion of ghosts, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Beardless One, the Ride of the,</q> <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Beating'/>
<l>Beating as a mode of purification, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; people as a mode of conveying good qualities, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with skins of sacrificial victims, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with green boughs, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; persons, animals, or things to deliver them from demons and ghosts, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beating the air to drive away demons or
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
ghosts, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauce and Perche, in France, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauvais, the Festival of Fools at, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuana king, cure of, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bedriacum, the battle of, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Befana at Rome and elsewhere, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Behar, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bekes, in Hungary, mode of fertilizing women in, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel, a Babylonian deity, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belethus, J., <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belgium, the King of the Bean in, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bella Coola Indians of N. W. America, their masked dances, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bells on animal used as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rung to expel demons, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rung as a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in the expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used at the expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by dancers, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rung to make grass and flax grow, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>golden, worn by human representatives of gods in Mexico, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benin, time of the <q>grand devils</q> in, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bergell in the Grisons, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berkhampstead, cure for ague in, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berosus, Babylonian historian, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besisi of the Malay Peninsula, their carnival at rice-harvest, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethlehem, the star of, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bevan, Professor A. A., <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beverley minster, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhars of India, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhootan, cairns in, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhotiyas of Juhar, their use of a scapegoat, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biajas of Borneo, their expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biggar, <q>Burning out the Old Year</q> at, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bikol, in Luzon, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilaspur, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilda in Algeria, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birch, sprigs of, a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to beat people with at Easter and Christmas, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees in popular cure for gout, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bird-chief of the Sea Dyaks, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birds as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishop, the Boy, on Holy Innocents' Day, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Innocents, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishop, Mrs., quoted, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bismarck Archipelago, the Melanesians of the, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bithynia and Pontus, rapid spread of Christianity in, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biyars of N. W. India, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black animals as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; god and white god among the Slavs, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black and white in relation to human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains in S. France, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blankenheim in the Eifel, the King of the Bean at, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood, fatigue let out with, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children used to knead a paste, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of pigs used in purificatory rites, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drawn from ears as penance, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bloodless altars, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blows to drive away ghosts, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boars, evil spirits transferred to, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boas, Franz, quoted, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bocage of Normandy, games of ball in the, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of forecasting the weather in, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eve of Twelfth Night in the, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bock, C., quoted, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bogle, George, envoy to Tibet, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemia, <q>Easter Smacks</q> in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Three Kings of Twelfth Day in, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Germans of Western, their custom at Christmas, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Twelfth Day among, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemian cures for fever, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remedy for jaundice, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhmerwald Mountains, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolang Mongondo in Celebes, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolbe in Macedonia, lake of, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolivia, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indians of, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boloki, the, of the Upper Congo, their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bonfires'/>
<l>Bonfires, leaping over, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Eve of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Book of the Dead</hi>, the Egyptian, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borneo, the Dyaks of, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Kayans of, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness expelled in a ship from, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Biajas and Dusuns of, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourlet, A., quoted, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boy Bishop on Holy Innocents' Day, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmanism, vestiges of, under Mohammedanism, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmans, sacrificial custom of the, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their theory of sacrifice, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Branches, fatigue transferred to, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness transferred to, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandenburg, Mark of, cure for headache and giddiness in, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bras Basah, a village on the Perak river, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>

<lg>
<l>Brass instrument sounded to frighten away demons, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazil, Indians of North-Western, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their masked dances, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breadalbane, use of a scapegoat in, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Brethren of the Ploughed Fields,</q> <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride, the last, privilege of, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brittany, custom of sticking pins into a saint's image in, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>riddles in, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forecasting the weather in, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooms used to sweep misfortune out of house, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Broomsticks, witches ride on, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, Dr. George, quoted, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruguière, Mgr., quoted, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunnen, Twelfth Night at, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchanan, Francis, quoted, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckthorn chewed to keep off ghosts, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a charm against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to beat cattle, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha, transmigrations of, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to spirits, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings to, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddhism in Burma, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pope of, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddhist Lent, the, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; monk, ceremony at the funeral of a, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; priests expel demons, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddhists of Ceylon, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nominal, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Budge, E. A. Wallis, quoted, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffalo calf, sins of dead transferred to a, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; dance to ensure a supply of buffaloes, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffaloes as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffooneries at the Festival of Fools, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bukaua, the, of German New Guinea, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarian cure for fever, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarians, their way of keeping off ghosts, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulls as scapegoats in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunyoro, in Central Africa, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burial of infants, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burkitt, Professor F. C., <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burlesques of ecclesiastical ritual, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burma, belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tug-of-war in, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burmese Lent, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Burning the Old Year,</q> <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Biggar, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Sandan and Hercules, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; witches alive, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on May Day in the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Walpurgis Night in Bohemia;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, in Silesia and Saxony, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buru, demons of sickness expelled in a proa from, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burying the evil spirit, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bushes, ailments transferred to, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bushmen, the, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterflies, annual expulsion of, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterfly dance, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffres of South Africa, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairns to which every passer-by adds a stone, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>near shrines of saints, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings at, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Heaps'>Heaps</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairo, cure for toothache and headache at, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cake on Twelfth Night used to determine the King, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put on horn of ox, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to Cronus, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cakes, special, at New Year, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with twelve knobs offered to gods, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabar, Old, biennial expulsion of demons at, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; River, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabria, annual expulsion of witches in, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendar of the Mayas of Yucatan, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the primitive Aryans, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Celts of Gaul, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Coligny, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Alexandrian, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Babylonian, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calicut, ceremonies at sowing in, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>California, the Pomos of, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodia, annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>palace of the Kings of Cambodia purged of devils, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridge, Lord of Misrule at, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camel, plague transferred to, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camels infested by jinn, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cameroons, the, of West Africa, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candlemas, dances at, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candles, twelve, on Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt at the Feast of Purim, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannibal banquets, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canton, the province of, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caprification, the artificial fertilization of fig-trees, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caprificus</foreign>, the wild fig-tree, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Car Nicobar, annual expulsion of devils in, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carabas and Barabbas, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carmona in Andalusia, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival, bell-ringing processions at the, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Senseless Thursday in, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Purim, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Carrying out Death,</q> <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casablanca in Morocco, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>

<lg>
<l>Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar, the Three Kings of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castilian peasants, their dances in May, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casting the skin supposed to be a mode of renewing youth, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle exposed to attacks of witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaten to do them good, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caucasus, the Albanians of the, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caunians of Asia Minor, their expulsion of foreign gods, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cecrops, first king of Attica, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cedar-bark ornaments worn in dances, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celebes, Bolang Mongondo in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Minahassa in, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Central, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celts, their mode of forecasting the weather of the year, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Gaul, their calendar, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceram, sicknesses expelled in a ship from, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceylon, fear of demons in, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaeronea, the <q>expulsion of hunger</q> at, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chain used to expel demons, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chains clanked as a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clanked in masquerade, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaldeans, magic of, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalking up crosses as a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamar caste, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamba in India, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chambers, E. K., quoted, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chameleon, ceremony at killing a, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chariots, epidemics sent away in toy, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheremiss of Russia, their expulsion of Satan, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokee Indians, annual expulsion of evils among the, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheshire, cure for thrush in, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for warts in, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chickens as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chicomecohuatl, Mexican goddess of maize, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girl annually sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Childermas (Holy Innocents' Day), <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children personating spirits, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, the Miotse of, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men possessed by spirits in, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Mossos of, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Shans of Southern, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, aboriginal tribes of, their use of a human scapegoat, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their annual destruction of evils, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinese festival of new fire, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chins of Burma, their way of keeping off cholera, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chirouba</foreign>, festival in Manapur, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chirus of Assam, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chitral, devil-driving in, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chittagong, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hill Tracts, the Chukmas of the, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choerilus, historian, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cholera sent away in animal scapegoats, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, demon of, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent away on a raft, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, goddess of, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cholula, a city of Mexico, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chota Nagpur in India, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of disease in, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ, the crucifixion of, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian festivals, the great, timed by the Church to coincide with old pagan festivals, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, Latin, its tolerance of rustic paganism, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christmas, custom of young men and women beating each other at, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an old midwinter festival of the sun-god, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, Mexican festival on, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Old (Twelfth Night), <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, witches active on, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chukmas, the tug-of-war among the, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church bells a protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Churn-dashers ridden by witches, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chwolsohn, D., on the worship of Haman, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ciallos, intercalary month of Gallic calendar, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilicia, Tarsus in, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cingalese, the tug-of-war among the, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>devil-dancers, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cinteotl or Centeotl, Mexican goddess of maize, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision Day, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clangour of metal used to dispel demons, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clanking chains as a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clark, J. V. H., <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, E. D., quoted, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clashing of metal instruments a protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to dispel demons, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clavigero, historian of Mexico, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clippings of nails in popular cures, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clowns in processions, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cochinchina, mode of disposing of ghosts in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock, disease transferred to a white, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cocks as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coligny calendar of Gaul, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columella on caprification, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>

<lg>
<l>Comana, sacred harlots at, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of Ma at, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comitium, dances of the Salii in the, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion by means of stones, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concubines of a king taken by his successor, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condé in Normandy, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession of sins, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conflicts, annual, at the New Year, old intention of, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congrégation de Notre Dame at Paris, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consumption, cure for, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, A. B., <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, Captain James, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cootchie, a demon, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cora Indians of Mexico, their dance at sowing, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dramatic dances, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coran, the, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corea, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traps for demons in, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirit of disease expelled in, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tug-of-war in, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coreans, their annual ceremonies for the riddance of evils, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn festivals of the Cora Indians, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -ears, wreath of, as badge of priestly office, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sieve beaten at ceremony, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornel-tree in popular remedy, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornouaille in Brittany, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Corpse-praying priest,</q> <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corpses devoured by members of Secret Societies, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cos, custom of Greek peasants in, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmogonies, primitive, perhaps influenced by human sacrifices, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosquin, E., on the book of Esther, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coughs transferred to animals, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Couppé, Mgr., quoted, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crabs change their skin, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crackers ignited to expel demons, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation of the world, legends of, influenced by human sacrifices, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creator beheaded, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices himself daily to create the world afresh, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creeping through an arch as a cure, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cretan festival of Hermes, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crimes, sticks or stones piled on the scene of, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criminals sacrificed, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croatia, Good Friday custom in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croesus on the pyre, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronia, a Greek festival resembling the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Olympia, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronion, a Greek month, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronus and the Cronia, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Golden Age, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and human sacrifice, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross-roads, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings at, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches at, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crosses painted with tar as charms against ghosts and vampyres, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chalked on doors as protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, made by the King of the Bean, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crow as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crucifixion of Christ, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumont, Franz, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuzco, its scenery, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cybele and Attis, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus and Croesus, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahomey, Porto Novo in, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalton, E. T., quoted, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dance at cairns, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the buffalo dance to ensure a supply of buffaloes, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to cause the grass to grow, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dancers personate spirits, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dances of the witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Salii, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to promote the growth of the crops, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at sowing, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taught by animals, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for rain, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>solemn Mexican, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Castilian peasants in May, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of salt-makers in Mexico, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to make hemp grow tall, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as dramatic performances of myths, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bestowed on men by spirits, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in imitation of animals, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dances, masked, to promote fertility, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of savages, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ensure good crops, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dancing to obtain the favour of the gods, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dandaki, King, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Dark</q> moon and <q>light</q> moon, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, Sir Francis, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dasius, martyrdom of St., <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dassera festival in Nepaul, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Date palm, artificial fertilization of the, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davies, T. Witton, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, disembodied souls of the, dreaded, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of the, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ghosts of the, periodically expelled, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the, received by their relations once a year, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, spirits of the, in the Philippine Islands, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Timor, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death, the funeral of, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ceremony of carrying out, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savage tales of the origin of, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debang monastery at Lhasa, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<lg>
<l>December, annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of the heathen of Harran in, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Saturnalia held in, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decle, L., <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Goeje, M. J., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deified men, sacrifices of, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delaware Indians, their remedies for sins, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demonophobia in India, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demon-worship, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Propitiation'>Propitiation</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Demons'/>
<l>Demons bunged up, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omnipresence of, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propitiation of, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious purification intended to ward off, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cause sickness, failure of crops, etc., <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of cholera, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men disguised as, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decoyed by a pig, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conjured into images, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put to flight by clangour of metal, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>banned by masks, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exorcised by bells, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Devil'>Devil</ref> <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> <ref target='Index-Devils'>Devils</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Mortival, Roger, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derceto, the fish goddess of Ascalon, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Ricci, S., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deslawen, village of Bohemia, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Devil'/>
<l>Devil driven away by paper kites, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devil-driving in Chitral, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devil's Neck, the, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Devils'/>
<l>Devils personated by men, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Demons'>Demons</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devonshire, cure for cough in, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dharmi or Dharmesh, the Supreme God of the Oraons, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dice used in divination, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>played at festivals, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dieri tribe of Central Australia, their expulsion of a demon, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinkas, their use of cows as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dio Chrysostom on the Sacaea, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his account of the treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysiac festival of the opening of the wine jars, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysus and the drama, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disease transferred to other people, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to tree, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caused by ghosts, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent away in little ships, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dittmar, C. von, quoted, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divination on Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divine animals as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog, sickness transferred to, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of white, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog-demon of epilepsy, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doreh in Dutch New Guinea, the tug-of-war at, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doubs, Montagne de, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Douglas, Alexander, victim of witchcraft, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doutté, E., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doves of Astarte, the sacred, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dracaena terminalis</foreign>, its leaves used to beat the sick, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dramas, sacred, as magical rites, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dravidian tribes of N. India, their cure for epilepsy, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, festival of, among the Iroquois, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Dreikönigstag</foreign>, Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Driving out the Witches,</q> <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Drowo</foreign>, gods, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drums beaten to expel demons, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dubrowitschi, a Russian village, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duck as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dudilaa, a spirit who lives in the sun, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumannos, a month of the Gallic calendar, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duran, Diego, Spanish historian of Mexico, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durostorum in Moesia, celebration of the Saturnalia at, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dussaud, René, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dusuns of Borneo, their annual expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyak priestesses, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of evil, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of neutralizing bad omens, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyaks, their <q>lying heaps,</q> <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their Head Feast, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dying god as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eabani, Babylonian hero, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ears, blood drawn from, as penance, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earth, the Mistress of the, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Egyptian, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earthman, the, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East, the Wise Men of the, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Indian Islands, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Indies, the tug-of-war in the, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter an old vernal festival of the vegetation-god, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; eggs, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve in Albania, expulsion of Kore on, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Monday, <q>Easter Smacks</q> on, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; Smacks</q> in Germany and Austria, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sunday, ceremony on the Eve of, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Tuesday, <q>Easter Smacks</q> on, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>

<lg>
<l>Eastertide, expulsion of evils at, in Calabria, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eck, R. van, quoted, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edward VI., his Lord of Misrule, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effigies, disease transferred to, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demons conjured into, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>substituted for human victims, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effigy of baby used to fertilize women, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eggs, red Easter, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, mode of laying ghosts in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modern, belief in the jinn in, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Isis and Osiris in, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, the ancient, their belief in spirits, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of bulls as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the five supplementary days of their year, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eifel, the King of the Bean in the, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eight days, feast and license of, before expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ekoi, the, of West Africa, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elamite deities in opposition to Babylonian deities, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inscriptions, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elamites, the hereditary foes of the Babylonians, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elaphebolion, an Athenian month, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elaphius, an Elean month, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elder brother, the sin of marrying before an, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elgon, Mount, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elis, law of, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellis, W., quoted, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Embodied evils, expulsion of, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emetics as remedies for sins, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endle, S., quoted, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>England, cure of warts in, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King of the Bean in, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Boy Bishop in, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enigmas, ceremonial use of, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Riddles'>Riddles</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Entlebuch in Switzerland, expulsion of Posterli at, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidaurus, Aesculapius at, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidemics attributed to demons, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept off by means of a plough, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent away in toy chariots, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Epilepsy'/>
<l>Epilepsy, cure for, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Highland treatment of, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman cure for, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hindoo cure for, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cured by beating, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Falling-Sickness'>Falling Sickness</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphany, annual expulsion of the powers of evil at, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King of the Bean on, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Twelfth-Night'>Twelfth Night</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eponyms, annual, as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Equinox, the vernal, festival of Cronus at, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persian marriages at the, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Equos, a Gallic month, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erech, Babylonian city, Ishtar at, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erz-gebirge, the Saxon, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esagila, temple at Babylon, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esquimaux of Labrador, their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Point Barrow, their expulsion of Luña, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Baffin Land, their expulsion of Sedna, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Central, the tug-of-war among the, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Bering Strait, their masquerades, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esther, fast of, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the story of, acted as a comedy at Purim, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the book of, its date and purpose, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its Persian colouring, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duplication of the personages in, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the personages unmasked, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Mordecai equivalent to Ishtar and Marduk, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the duplicates of Vashti and Haman, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Vashti, temporary queens, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonian mode of transferring bad luck to trees, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of the devil, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eton College, Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euhemerism, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, transference of evil in, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of demons and witches in, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of evils in, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>masquerades in modern, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>European folk-custom of <q>carrying out Death,</q> <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eve and Adam, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evening Star, the goddess of the, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evessen, in Brunswick, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil, the transference of, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to other people, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to sticks and stones, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to animals, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to men, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of, in Europe, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirits, banishment of, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Demons'>Demons</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil-Merodach, Babylonian king, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evils transferred to trees, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nailed into trees, walls, etc., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occasional expulsion of, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>periodic expulsion of, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of embodied, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of, in a material vehicle, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Expulsion'>Expulsion</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewe, white-footed, as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewe-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Excommunication of human scapegoat, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Execution by stoning, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exeter, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcising spirits at sowing the seed, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>

<lg>
<l>Exorcism of devils in Morocco, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual, of the evil spirit in Japan, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nicobarese ceremony of, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcists, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expiation for sin, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Expulsion'/>
<l>Expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the direct or immediate and the indirect or mediate, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occasional, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>periodic, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of embodied evils, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of evils in a material vehicle, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual, of demons and witches in Europe, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Trows in Shetland, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of hunger at Chaeronea, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of winter, ceremony of the, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Faditras</foreign> among the Malagasy, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faiths of the world, the great, their little influence on common men, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Falling-Sickness'/>
<l>Falling sickness, cure for, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Epilepsy'>Epilepsy</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fans, the, of West Africa, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Fast of Esther</q> before Purim, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatigue transferred to stones or sticks, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>let out with blood, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fawckner, Captain James, quoted, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fear as a source of religion, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feast, the Great, in Morocco, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Lanterns in Japan, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>February and March, the season of the spring sowing in Italy, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferghana in Turkestan, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferrers, George, a Lord of Misrule, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertility of the ground, magical ceremony to promote the, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertilization, artificial, of fig-trees, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the date palm, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertilizing virtue attributed to certain sticks, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Festival of dreams</q> among the Iroquois, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Flaying of Men, Mexican, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Fools in France, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Germany, Bohemia, and England, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Innocents, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festivals, the great Christian, timed by the Church to coincide with old pagan festivals, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Fête des Fous</foreign> in France, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>des Rois</foreign>, Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fever, remedy for, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman cure for, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popular cures for, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven away by firing guns, etc., <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fielding, H., quoted, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiends burnt in fire, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fig, the wild, human scapegoats beaten with branches of, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fig-tree, sacred, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees artificially fertilized, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personated by human victims, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fights, annual, at the New Year, old intention of, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Figs, black and white, worn by human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiji, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual ceremony at appearance of sea-slug in, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fir used to beat people with at Christmas, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees in popular cure, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, Mexican god of, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to burn witches, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; new, at New Year, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chinese festival of the, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacred, of King of Uganda, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by friction, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirit, annual expulsion of the, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fires extinguished during ceremony, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonial, on Eve of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to burn fiends, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Bonfires'>Bonfires</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Five days' duration of mock king's reign, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; days' reign of mock king at the Sacaea, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Semiramis, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flax, giddiness transferred to, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bells rung to make flax grow, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flaying of Men, Mexican festival of the, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flemish cure for ague, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flight from the demons of disease, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flint, holed, a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flood, the great, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flowers, the goddess of, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flying Spirits, the, at Lhasa, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food set out for ghosts, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fools in processions of maskers, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, festival of, in France, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Germany, Bohemia, and England, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Football, suggested origin of, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fords, offerings and prayers at, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Formosa, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forty days, man treated as a god during, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man personating god during, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; nights of mourning for Persephone, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foucart, G., quoted, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fountains Abbey, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowler, W. Warde, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowls as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, cure of warts in, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King of the
<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
Bean in, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Festival of Fools in, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franche-Comté, the King of the Bean in, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on the Eve of Twelfth Night in, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Three Kings of Twelfth Day in, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lent in, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankenwald Mountains, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankfort, the feast of Purim at, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres Arvales</foreign>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>French and English</q> or the <q>Tug-of-war</q> as a religious or magical rite, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>French cure for fever, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fresh and green, beating people, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frogs, malady transferred to, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruit-trees, fire applied to, on Eve of Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruitful tree, use of stick cut from a, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fumigation with juniper and rue as a precaution against witches, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Funeral, relations whipped at a, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Death, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ceremony in Uganda, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a Buddhist monk, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furrow drawn round village as protection against epidemic, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallas, their mode of expelling fever, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual period of license among the, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their story of the origin of death, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallows-hill, witches at, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gambling allowed during three days of the year, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Games of ball played to produce rain or dry weather, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garcilasso de la Vega, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garos of Assam, their annual use of a scapegoat, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gatto, in Benin, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, the Celts of, their calendar, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ge-lug-pa, a Lamaist sect, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geraestius, a Greek month, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerard, E., quoted, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King of the Bean in, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghansyam Deo, a deity of the Gonds, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghats, the Eastern, use of scapegoats in the, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts of suicides feared, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnation of women by, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shut up in wood, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modes of laying, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diseases caused by, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the dead periodically expelled, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman festival of, in May, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven off by blows, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giddiness, cure for, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gilgamesh'/>
<l>Gilgamesh, the epic of, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his name formerly read as Izdubar, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Babylonian hero, beloved by the goddess Ishtar, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilgamus, a Babylonian king, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilgenburg in Masuren, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilyaks of the Amoor, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glamorganshire, cure for warts in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glen Mor, in Islay, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gloucester, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gloucestershire, Eve of Twelfth Day in, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat's Marsh at Rome, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goats, evil transferred to, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gobi, the desert of, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, killing the, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the black and the white, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dying, as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the killing of the, in Mexico, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resurrection of the, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods and goddesses represented by living men and women, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Mexican, burn themselves to create the sun, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mother of the, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman annually sacrificed in the character of the Mother of the, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; shut up in wood, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Maoris, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Pelew Islanders, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personated by priests, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented in masquerades, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goitre, popular cure for, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gold Coast of West Africa, expulsion of demons on the, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golden Age, the, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the reign of Saturn, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golden bells worn by human representatives of gods in Mexico, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gomes, E. H., on the head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonds of India, human scapegoats among the, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gongs beaten to expel demons, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of witches in Silesia on, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle beaten on, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of beating each other with rods on, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goudie, Mr. Gilbert, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Gour-deziou</foreign>, <q>Supplementary Days,</q> in Brittany, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gout, popular cures for, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graetz, H., <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gran Chaco, Indians of the, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grass to grow, dances to cause the, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bells rung to cause the, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grasshoppers, sacrifice of, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Grass-ringers,</q> <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graubünden (the Grisons), <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graves, heaps of sticks or stones on, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>

<lg>
<l>Great Bassam in Guinea, exorcism of evil spirit at, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Feast, the, in Morocco, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; Purification,</q> Japanese ceremony, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, ancient, custom of stone-throwing in, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Saturnalia in, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek use of swallows as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of laurel in purification, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek women, their mourning for Persephone, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greeks, the ancient, their cure for love, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Asia Minor, their use of human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green boughs, custom of beating young people with, at Christmas, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grisons, masquerades in the, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Groot, J. J. M. de, quoted, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grove, the Arician, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grub in the Grisons, masquerade at, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grubb, W. Barbrooke, quoted, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grünberg in Silesia, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guardian spirits of animals, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guatemala, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indians of, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaycurus, Indian nation, their ceremony at appearance of the Pleiades, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gudea, king of Southern Babylonia, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guessing dreams, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guiana, British, the Arawaks of, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, French, the Roocooyen Indians of, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guinea, annual expulsion of the devil in, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, French, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; negroes, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guns fired to expel demons, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>against witches, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gypsies, annual ceremony performed by the, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hagen, B., quoted, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair of patient inserted in oak, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hak-Ka, the, a native race in the province of Canton, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halberstadt in Thüringen, annual ceremony at, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall in the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halmahera, the Alfoors of, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at a funeral in, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haman, effigies of, burnt at Purim, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Mordecai, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as temporary kings, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Vashti the duplicates of Mordecai and Vashti, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haman, a god worshipped by the heathen of Harran, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hâmân-Sûr, a name for Purim, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammedatha, father of Haman, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammer, sick people struck with a, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hands of deity, ceremony of grasping the, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hantoes</foreign>, spirits, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harlots, sacred, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Comana, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harpooning a spirit, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harran, the heathen of, their custom in December, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their marriage festival of all the gods, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship a god Haman, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, Miss J. E., <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harthoorn, S. E., quoted, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartland, E. S., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvest, annual expulsion of demons at or after, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hasselt, J. L. van, quoted, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hastings, Warren, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haupt, P., <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawk, omens from, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawthorn a charm against ghosts, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headache, cure for, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headman sacred, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Heaps'/>
<l>Heaps of stones, sticks, or leaves, to which every passer-by adds, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the scene of crimes, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on graves, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>lying heaps,</q> <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearn, Lafcadio, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearts of human victims offered to the sun, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews, their custom as to leprosy, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebron, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hecatombaeon, an Athenian month, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hecquard, H., <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heitsi-eibib, Hottentot god or hero, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemp, augury as to the height of the, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances to make hemp grow tall, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules, cake with twelve knobs offered to, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Sandan, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death on a pyre, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Omphale, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hereford, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herefordshire, the sin-eater in, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eve of Twelfth Day in, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermes, wayside images of, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cretan festival of, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Argus, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotus on the worship of Ishtar (Astarte), <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hide beaten with rods, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis, festival of the Pyre at, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Highlands'/>
<l>Highlands of Scotland, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Twelve Days in the, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildesheim, bell-ringing at, on Ascension Day, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himalayan districts of N. W. India, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>

<lg>
<l>Hindoo Koosh, expulsion of demons in the, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tribes, their annual expulsion of demons after harvest, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoos, transference of evil among the, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirt, H., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobby-horse to carry away spirit of smallpox, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hochofen, village of Bohemia, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hockey played as a ceremony, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holed flint a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Innocents' Day, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young people beat each other on, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoeopathic or imitative magic, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homogeneity of civilization in prehistoric times in Southern Europe and Western Asia, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honorius and Theodosius, decree of, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hood Bay in New Guinea, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horns blown to expel demons, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ban witches, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Penzance on eve of May Day, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by maskers, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of straw worn to keep off demons, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of goat a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse sacrificed to Mars, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beloved by Ishtar, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beloved by Semiramis, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -shoes a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, the birth of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hos of N. E. India, their annual expulsion of demons at harvest, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Togoland, their annual expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hosskirch in Swabia, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hottentots, the, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoyerswerda in Silesia, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huddler</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huttler</foreign> in the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Hudel</foreign>-running in the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huichol Indians of Mexico, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huitzilopochtli, great Mexican god, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young man sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hall of, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huixtocihuatl, Mexican goddess of Salt, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman annually sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human god and goddess, their enforced union, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; representatives of gods sacrificed in Mexico, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifice, successive mitigations of, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifices, their influence on cosmogonical theories, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; scapegoats, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Rome, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in classical antiquity, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Greece, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for beating the, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>victims, men clad in the skins of, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunger, expulsion of, at Chaeronea, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurons, their way of expelling sickness, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Husbandman, the Roman, his prayers to Mars, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huss, John, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huttler</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Huddler</foreign> in the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huzuls, the, of the Carpathians, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyginus on the death of Semiramis, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hysteria cured by beating, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Identification of girl with Maize Goddess, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idols, nails knocked into, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igbodu, a sacred grove, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igliwa, a Berber tribe, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ilamatecutli, Mexican goddess, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ill Luck embodied in an ascetic, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the casting away of, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Im Thurn, Sir Everard F., quoted, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Images, demons conjured into, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immestar in Syria, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immortality, how men lost the boon of, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Impregnation of women by ghosts, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inanimate objects, transference of evil to, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Inao</foreign>, sacred whittled sticks, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inauguration of a king in ancient India, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incas of Peru, their annual expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incense used against witches, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, fear of demons in, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>epidemics sent away in toy chariots in, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dravidian tribes of Northern, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inauguration of a king in ancient, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Twelve Days in ancient, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of the drama in, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Central Provinces of, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of disease in the, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the North-Western Provinces of, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tug-of-war in, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indian Archipelago, expulsion of diseases in the, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tribes of N. W. America, their masked dances, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians, mutual scourgings of South American, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indo-China, worship of spirits in, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indra, creation of the great god, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infant, children whipt at death of an, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>

<lg>
<l>Infants, burial of, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infertility, evil spirits of, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Influenza expelled by scapegoat, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Initiation by spirits, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocents, Bishop of, in France, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Festival of the, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocents' Day, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young people beat each other on, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspired men in China, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercalary month, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; period of five days, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; periods, customs and superstitions attaching to, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deemed unlucky, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercalation, rudimentary, to equate lunar and solar years, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interregnum on intercalary days, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inversion of social ranks at the Saturnalia and kindred festivals, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, Twelfth Night in, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iroquois, their <q>festival of dreams,</q> <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of scapegoats, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iser Mountains in Silesia, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iserlohn in Westphalia, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ishtar'/>
<l>Ishtar, a great Babylonian goddess, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with Sirius, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Erech, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her visit to Anu, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goddess of fertility in animals, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Astarte'>Astarte</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Gilgamesh, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Semiramis, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Tammuz, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, the birth of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Osiris, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italian cure for fever, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>season of sowing in spring, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, cure of warts in, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Izdubar. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Gilgamesh'>Gilgamesh</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackson, Professor Henry, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobsen, J. Adrian, on the Secret Societies of N. W. America, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jalno, temporary ruler at Lhasa, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, M. R., <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref> <hi rend='italic'>notes</hi>  2 and  3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jamieson, J., on Trows, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japan, cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Feast of Lanterns in, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of evil in, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jastrow, M., on the epic of Gilgamesh, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Jataka</foreign>, the, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jaundice, cure for, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Java, belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tenggerese of, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jay, blue, as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jealousy, cure for, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jensen, P., <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theory of Haman and Vashti as Elamite deities, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Anaitis, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the fast of Esther, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jepur in India, use of scapegoat at, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, the weeping for Tammuz at, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish calendar, New Year's Day of the, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; converts, form of abjuration used by, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day of Atonement, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of Purim, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; use of scapegoats, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews accused of ritual murders, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the great deliverance of the, at Purim, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jinn, belief in the, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>infesting camels, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jochelson, W., quoted, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johns, Rev. C. H. W., <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref> <hi rend='italic'>notes</hi> 2 and 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joustra, M., quoted, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juhar, the Bhotiyas of, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>July, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonae Caprotinae</foreign> in, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>June, Mexican human sacrifice in, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jungle Mother, the, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juniper burned to keep out ghosts, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to beat people with, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; berries, fumigation with, as a precaution against witches, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juno Caprotina, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter, temple of Capitoline, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kabyle cure for jealousy, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kacharis, the, of Assam, their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kachins of Burma, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kai, the, of German New Guinea, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kalau</foreign>, demons, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kaliths</foreign>, gods of the Pelew Islanders, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatka, the tug-of-war in, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatkans, their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanagra in India, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanhar river, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karens of Burma, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Karkantzari</foreign>, fiends or monsters in Macedonia, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karpathos, a Greek island, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kasan Government in Russia, the Wotyaks of the, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaua Indians of N. W. Brazil, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their masked dances, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaumpuli, god of plague, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kausika Sutra</hi>, Indian book of magic, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kayans, the, of Borneo, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their masked dances, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>

<lg>
<l>Keb, the Egyptian Earth-god, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kei Islands, expulsion of demons in the, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; river, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kengtung in Burma, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kennedy, Prof. A. R. S., quoted, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kharwars of N. India, their use of scapegoats, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khasis of Assam, their annual expulsion of demon of plague, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khonds, their annual expulsion of demons at seed-time, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their treatment of human victims, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Killing the god, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Mexico, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, temporary, in Siam, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient India, inauguration of a, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assembly for determining the fate of the, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mock or temporary, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Queen of May, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Bean, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Merton College, Oxford, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Years at Lhasa, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King's College, Cambridge, Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings, the Three, on Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magistrates at Olympia called, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marry the wives and concubines of their predecessors, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingsley, Mary H., quoted, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kioga Lake, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiriwina, in S. E. New Guinea, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirkland, Rev. Mr., <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kitching, A. L., quoted, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kites, artificial, used to drive away the devil, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>paper, flown as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kleintitschen, P. A., quoted, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kleptomania, cure for, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kling or Klieng, a mythical hero of the Dyaks, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knives under the threshold, a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knots tied in branches of trees as remedies, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knotted thread in magic, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kobeua Indians of N. W. Brazil, their masked dances, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kore, expulsion of, on Easter Eve in Albania, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Korkus, the, of India, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Korwas of Mirzapur, their use of scapegoats, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koryaks, the, of N. E. Asia, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of demons among the, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kubary, J., quoted, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kumaon, in N. W. India, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sliding down a rope in, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kumis, the, of S. E. India, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kurmis of India, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kururumany, the Arawak creator, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuskokwin River, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kwakiutl Indians of N. W. America, their masked dances, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labrador, fear of demons in, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labruguière, in S. France, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagarde, on the <q>Ride of the Beardless One,</q> <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lakor, island of, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lama of Tibet, the Grand, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Teshu, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamaist sects, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Lanchang</foreign>, a Malay craft, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lande-Patry in Normandy, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lane, E. W., quoted, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanterns, feast of, in Japan, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laos, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laosians of Siam, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Last day of the year, annual expulsion of demons on the, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latin Christianity, its tolerance of rustic paganism, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurel in purification, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurels, ceremony of renewing the, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lawes, W. G., quoted, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lead, melted, in cure, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leafman, the, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaping over bonfires, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaps to promote the growth of the crops, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaves, disease transferred to, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatigue transferred to, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to expel demons, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness transferred to, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in exorcism, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lehmann-Haupt, C. F., <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lehner, Stefan, quoted, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leith Links, witches burnt on, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leme, the river, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lengua Indians, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lent, ceremony at Halberstadt in, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps derived from an old pagan period of abstinence observed for the growth of the seed, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenten fast, its origin, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leobschütz district of Silesia, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leprosy, Hebrew custom as to, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mexican goddess of, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lerwick, ceremony of Up-helly-a' at, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leti, island of, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leucadians, their use of human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lhasa, ceremony of the Tibetan New Year at, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Liar's mound, the,</q> in Borneo, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>

<lg>
<l>License, month of general, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>periods of, preceding or following the annual expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>granted to slaves at the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licentious rites for the fertilization of the ground, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lichfield, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licorice root used to beat people with at Easter, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liebrecht, F., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lienz in the Tyrol, masquerade at, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lime-tree in popular cure, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limewood used at expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincoln, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion beloved by Ishtar, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; with the Sheepskins,</q> <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livuans, the, of New Britain, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livy on the annual custom of knocking a nail, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lizard or snake in annual ceremony for the riddance of evils, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lizards and serpents supposed to renew their youth by casting their skins, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Llama, black, as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loango, practice of knocking nails into idols in, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Lokoala</foreign>, initiation by spirits, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord of the Diamond, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Misrule, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in England, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lorraine, King and Queen of the Bean in, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loth, J., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lots cast at Purim, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis XIV. as King of the Bean, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lous, a Babylonian month, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love, cure for, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lover's Leap, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lovers of Semiramis and Ishtar, their sad fate, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, as to the rites of Hierapolis, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ludlow in Shropshire, the tug-of-war at, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lugg, river, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lules'/>
<l>Lules or Tonocotes of the Gran Chaco, their behaviour in an epidemic, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lumholtz, C., quoted, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lunar year equated to solar year by intercalation, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lusatia, the <q>Witch-burning</q> in, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lushais of Assam, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luzon, exorcism in, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycaeus, Mount, in Arcadia, human sacrifice on, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lydia, the burning of kings in, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lydus, Joannes, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ma, goddess worshipped at Comana, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacCulloch, J. A., <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonald, Rev. James, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonell, Lady Agnes, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonian superstitions as to the Twelve Days, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Machindranath temple at Lhasa, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackenzie, Sheriff David J., <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrobius on institution of the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madagascar, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madis, the, of Central Africa, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magdalen College, Oxford, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magic in ancient India, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and witchcraft, permanence of the belief in, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>homoeopathic or imitative, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnesia on the Maeander, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahadeva, propitiation of, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maize, the goddess of the Young, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mexican goddesses of, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Majhwars, Dravidian race of Mirzapur, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makrîzî, Arabic writer, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malabar, use of cows as scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malagasy, <foreign rend='italic'>faditras</foreign> among the, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malay Peninsula, the Besisi of the, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malays, their use of birds as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stratification of religious beliefs among the, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mallans of India, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamurius Veturius in ancient Rome, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man-god in China, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandan Indians, their annual expulsion of the devil, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manipur, Rajah of, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual eponyms in, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mannhardt, W., on processions of maskers, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on beating human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mantras, the, of the Malay Peninsula, their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maori gods, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maraves, the, of South Africa, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcellus of Bordeaux, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>March, annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of witches in, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of evils in, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of Mamurius Veturius in, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old Roman year began in, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances of the Salii in, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bell-ringing procession on the first of, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of beating
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
people and cattle in, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage festival of all the gods in, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of the Matronalia in, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marduk or Merodach, Babylonian god, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a deliverer from demons, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ceremonial marriage at New Year, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the votaries of, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marjoram a protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mar-na, a Philistine deity, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage of the god Marduk, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, mock or real, of human victims, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of all the gods, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mars a god of vegetation, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Old, at Rome, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Silvanus, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Marsaba</foreign>, a demon, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marseilles, human scapegoats at, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsh-marigolds a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin, Rev. John, quoted, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martyrdom of St. Dasius, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mascal or Festival of the Cross in Abyssinia, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mashti, supposed name of Elamite goddess, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mask, two-faced, worn by image of goddess, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Masks'>Masks</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masked dances and ceremonies of savages, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to promote fertility, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maskers in the Tyrol and Salzburg, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as bestowers of fertility, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be inspired by the spirits whom they represent, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Masks'/>
<l>Masks worn at expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intended to ban demons, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn at ceremonies to promote the growth of the crops, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by priests who personate gods, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn in religious dances and performances, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burned at end of masquerade, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treated as animate <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masquerades in modern Europe, intention of certain, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Master of the Revels, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masuren, <q>Easter Smacks</q> in, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mateer, S., quoted, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mater Dolorosa</foreign>, the ancient and the modern, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Material vehicles of immaterial things (fear, misfortune, disease, etc.), <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Materialization of prayer, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matronalia, festival of the, in March, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matse negroes of Togoland, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mawu, Supreme Being of Ewe negroes, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maxwell, W. E., quoted, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May, Mexican human sacrifices in, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances of Castilian peasants in, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King and Queen of, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eve of, witches abroad on, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Tyrol, <q>Burning out of the Witches</q> on, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches rob cows of milk on, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; morning, custom of herdsmen on, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayas of Yucatan, their annual expulsion of the demon, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their calendar, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their five supplementary days, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecca, stone-throwing at, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecklenburg, custom on Good Friday in, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of reckoning the Twelve Days in, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medicine-man, need of, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanesia, belief in demons in, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melenik in Macedonia, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men, evil transferred to, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possessed by spirits in China, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine, as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices of deified, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and women forbidden by Mosaic law to interchange dress, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mengap</foreign>, a Dyak liturgy, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merodach or Marduk, Babylonian deity, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merton College, Oxford, King of the Bean at, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metageitnion, a Greek month, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexican temples, their form, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexico, Indians of, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Cora Indians of, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tarahumare Indians of, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of skins of human victims in ancient, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing the god in, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of the creation of the sun in, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyer, Eduard, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midsummer Day, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, witches active on, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milan, festival of the Three Kings of Twelfth Day at, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milk, heifers beaten to make them yield, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milky juice of wild fig-tree in religious rite, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mimicry the principle of religious or magical dramas, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minahassa in Celebes, expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mingoli</foreign>, spirits of the dead, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miotse, the, of China, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mirzapur, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Korwas and Pataris of, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Misfortune swept out of house with brooms, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>

<lg>
<l>Misrule, the Lord of, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in England, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missiles hurled at dangerous ghosts or spirits, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mistress of the Earth, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitigations of human sacrifice, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mnevis, sacred Egyptian bull, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moa, island of, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mock king, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; marriage of human victims, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mockery of Christ, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Modai</foreign>, invisible spirits, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moesia, Durostorum in Lower, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mogador, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammed and the devil, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedan custom of raising cairns, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; saints, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Moles and Field-mice,</q> fire ceremony on Eve of Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molina, Spanish historian, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molonga, a demon, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mommsen, August, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongol transference of evil, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monkey sacrificed for riddance of evils, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montagne du Doubs, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Month during which men disguised as devils go about, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of general license before expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intercalary, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and moon, names for, in Aryan languages, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monumbo, the, of German New Guinea, their masked dances, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moon, bodily ailments transferred to the, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the waning, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the <q>dark</q> and the <q>light,</q> <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of the, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hearts of human victims offered to the, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the goddess of the, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and month, names for, in Aryan languages, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moors of Morocco, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravia, precautions against witchcraft in, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Easter Smacks</q> in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mordecai, his triumphal ride in Susa, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Esther equivalent to Marduk and Ishtar, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the duplicates of Haman and Vashti, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Haman, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as temporary kings, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morning Star, personated by a man, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the god of the, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morocco, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exorcism in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tug-of-war in, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of beating people in, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morris-dancers, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mortality, savage explanations of human, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mortlock Islanders, their belief in spirits, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosaic law forbids interchange of dress between men and women, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moses, the tomb of, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moslem custom of raising cairns, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mossos of China, their annual expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosul, cure for headache at, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mother of the Gods, Mexican goddess, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman annually sacrificed in the character of the, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -kin in royal families, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton, Professor J. H., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mounds of Semiramis, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mountain of Parting, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Movers, F. C., on the Sacaea, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mowat in British New Guinea, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mrus, the, of Aracan, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mule as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, K. O., on Sandan, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mundaris, the, of N. E. India, their annual saturnalia at harvest, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Munich, annual expulsion of the devil at, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Munzerabad in S. India, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muota Valley in Switzerland, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murder, heaps of sticks or stones on scenes of, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mylitta, Babylonian goddess, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysore in S. India, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysteries as magical ceremonies, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mythical beings represented by men and women, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myths in relation to magic, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>performed dramatically in dances, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabu, Babylonian god, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nagas of Assam, the tug-of-war among the, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahum, the prophet, on Nineveh, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahuntí, an Elamite goddess, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nailing evils into trees, walls, etc., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nails, clippings of, in popular cures, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knocked into trees, walls, etc., as remedy, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knocked into idols or fetishes, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knocked in ground as cure for epilepsy, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nakiza, the river, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nat</foreign> superstition in Burma, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nats</foreign>, spirits in Burma, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propitiation of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navona, Piazza, at Rome, ceremony of Befana on the, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebuchadnezzar, his record of the festival of Marduk, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Negritos, religion of the, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>

<lg>
<l>Neilgherry Hills, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nelson, E. W., on the masquerades of the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nemontemi</foreign>, the five supplementary days of the Aztec calendar, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nepaul, Dassera festival in, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nephthys, the birth of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nettles, whipping with, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neugramatin in Bohemia, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neumann, J. B., quoted, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Britain, the Melanesians of, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils in, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gazelle Peninsula in, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Caledonia, burying the evil spirit in, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of promoting growth of taros in, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; College, Oxford, Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, British, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in ghosts in, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, Dutch, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Papuans of, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, German, the Yabim of, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Bukaua of, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Kai of, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Monumbo of, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hebrideans, their story of the origin of death, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; yams, ceremonies before eating the, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Year, expulsion of evils at the, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not reckoned from first month, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sham fight at the, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the Tibetan, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival among the Iroquois, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tibetan, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival at Babylon, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Year's Day in Corea, annual riddance of evil on, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Tibet, ceremony on, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Swahili, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young women beat young men on, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Jewish calendar, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Zealand, human scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nganga</foreign>, medicine-man, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ngoc hoang, his message to men, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nias, expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explanation of human mortality in, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicaragua, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicholas Bishop, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicobar Islanders, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their annual expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islands, demon of disease sent away in a boat from the, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicobarese ceremony of exorcism, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nights, custom of reckoning by, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, tomb of Sardanapalus at, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning of Sandan at, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninus, Assyrian hero, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nirriti, goddess of evil, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nisan, Jewish month, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>No</foreign>, annual expulsion of demons in China, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noises made to expel demons, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nöldeke, Professor Th., on Purim and Esther, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Omanos and Anadates, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonae Caprotinae</foreign>, Roman celebration of the, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Normandy, the Bocage of, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northamptonshire cure for cough, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nortia, Etruscan goddess, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norwegian sailors, their use of rowan, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norwich, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>November, annual ceremony in, at catching sea-slug, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nut, the Egyptian sky-goddess, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyassa, Lake, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oak and wild olive, pyre of Hercules made of, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees in popular cures, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obassi Nsi, earth-god, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>October, annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman sacrifice of horse in, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oels, in Silesia, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oesel, Esthonian island, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Offerings at cairns, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to demons, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Oho-harahi</foreign>, a Japanese ceremony, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old Christmas Day (Twelfth Night), <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenberg, H., quoted, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenburg, popular cures in, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53-58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldfield, H. A., quoted, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olive, wild, and oak, pyre of Hercules made of, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree in popular remedy, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympia, festival of Cronus at, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olynthiac, river, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olynthus, tomb of, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omanos at Zela, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omens, mode of neutralizing bad, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omnipresence of demons, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omphale and Hercules, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>One-eyed buffoon in New Year ceremony, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onions used to foretell weather of the year, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onitsha, on the Niger, annual expulsion of evils at, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of human scapegoats at, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>

<lg>
<l>Opening of the Wine-jars, Dionysiac festival of the, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oraons, the, of Bengal, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of a human scapegoat, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orchards, fire applied to, on Eve of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orestes, purification of, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origin of death, savage tales of the, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orinoco, Indians of the, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orkney Islands, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of sickness in the, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orlagau in Thüringen, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oscans, the enemies of Rome, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, the birth of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Isis, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ottery St. Mary's, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oude, burial of infants in, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Our Mother among the Water,</q> Mexican goddess, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owl represented dramatically as a mystery, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ox, disease transferred to, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxen pledged on Eve of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxford, Lords of Misrule at, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pairing dogs, stick that has beaten, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palm Sunday, Russian custom on, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pan's image beaten by the Arcadians, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pancakes to scald fiends on New Year's Eve, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pandarus, tattoo marks of, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papa Westray, one of the Orkney Islands, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papuans, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parkinson, R., quoted, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parti, name of an Elamite deity, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passover, accusations of murders at, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the crucifixion of Christ at, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patagonians, their remedy for smallpox, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pataris of Mirzapur, their use of scapegoats, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pathian, a beneficent spirit, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paton, L. B., <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paton, W. R., on human scapegoats in ancient Greece, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Adam and Eve, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the crucifixion, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pauntley, parish of, Eve of Twelfth Day in, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pawnees, their human sacrifice, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Payne, E. J., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peach-tree in popular remedy, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Peaiman</foreign>, sorcerer, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peg used to transfer disease to tree, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pegging ailments into trees, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelew Islanders, their gods, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peloria, a Thessalian festival resembling the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelorian Zeus, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pemali</foreign>, taboo, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pembrokeshire, cure for warts in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penance by drawing blood from ears, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pennant, Thomas, quoted, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penzance, horn-blowing at, on the Eve of May Day, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perak, periodic expulsion of evils in, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the rajah of, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perche and Beauce, in France, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perchta, Frau, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perchta's Day, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign>, maskers in Salzburg and the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Percival, R., quoted, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perham, Rev. J., on the Head-feast of the Sea Dyaks, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Periodic expulsion of evils in a material vehicle, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Periods of license preceding or following the annual expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Περίψημα, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persephone, mourning for, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persia, cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the feast of Purim in, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian framework of the book of Esther, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings married the wives of their predecessors, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; marriages at the vernal equinox, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persians annually expel demons, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Sacaea celebrated by the, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peru, Indians of, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Incas of, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aymara Indians of, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>autumn festival in, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peruvian Indians, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Phees</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign>), evil spirits, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philadelphia in Lydia, coin of, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippine Islands, spirits of the dead in the, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippines, the Tagbanuas of the, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philo of Alexandria, on the mockery of King Agrippa, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocylides, the poet, on Nineveh, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, Cybele and Attis in, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piazza Navona at Rome, Befana on the, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig used to decoy demons, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig's blood used in purificatory rites, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilate and Christ, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piles of sticks or stones. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Heaps'>Heaps</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pillar, fever transferred to a, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pine-resin burnt as a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pins stuck into saint's image, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pinzgau district of Salzburg, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pitch smeared on doors to keep out ghosts, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pitchforks ridden by witches, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>

<lg>
<l>Pithoria, village in India, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pitteri Pennu, the god of increase, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plague transferred to plantain-tree, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>god of, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to camel, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preventive of, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demon of, expelled, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent away in scapegoat, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato on parricide, etc., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on poets, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on sorcery, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Playfair, Major A., quoted, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pleiades, ceremony at the appearance of the, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observed by savages, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny on cure of warts, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on cure for epilepsy, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny's letter to Trajan, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plough drawn round village to keep off epidemic, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Monday, the rites of, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughing, ceremonies at, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch on <q>the expulsion of hunger,</q> <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Po Then, a great spirit, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Point Barrow, the Esquimaux of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollution caused by murder, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesia, demons in, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomerania, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomos of California, their expulsion of devils, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pongau district of Salzburg, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontarlier, Eve of Twelfth Day in, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontiff of Zela in Pontus, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontus, rapid spread of Christianity in, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry on demons, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Port Charlotte in Islay, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Moresby in New Guinea, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porto Novo, annual expulsion of demons at, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poseidon, cake with twelve knobs offered to, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Posterli, expulsion of, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potala Hill at Lhasa, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poverty, annual expulsion of, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Powers, Stephen, quoted, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prajapati, the sacrifice of the creator, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, the materialization of, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at sowing, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayers at cairns or heaps of sticks or leaves, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presteign in Radnorshire, the tug-of-war at, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest, the corpse-praying, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests personating gods, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proa, demons of sickness expelled in a, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diseases sent away in a, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Processions for the expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bell-ringing, at the Carnival, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to drive away demons of infertility, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of maskers, W. Mannhardt on, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procopius, quoted, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propertius, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Propitiation'/>
<l>Propitiation of ancestral spirits, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of demons, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussia, <q>Easter Smacks</q> in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, West, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussian rulers, formerly burnt, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Public expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; scapegoats, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Puḫru</foreign>, <q>assembly,</q> <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Puithiam</foreign>, sorcerer, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puna Indians, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punjaub, human scapegoats in the, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puppy, blind, as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Pur</foreign> in the sense of <q>lot,</q> <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification by bathing or washing, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by means of stone-throwing, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious, intended to keep off demons, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Great, a Japanese ceremony, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by beating, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Feast of the, (Candlemas), <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival among the Cherokee Indians, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purim, the Jewish festival of, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of burning effigies of Haman at, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared to the Carnival, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to Persia, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purushu, great primordial giant, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyre, traditionary death of Asiatic kings and heroes on a, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of the, at Hierapolis, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, his saying as to swallows, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quauhtitlan, city in Mexico, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen of the Bean, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queensland, tribes of Central, their expulsion of a demon, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quetzalcoatl, a Mexican god, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Quickening</q> heifers with a branch of rowan, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quixos, Indians of the, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra, the Egyptian Sun-god, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Races to ensure good crops, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radnorshire, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rafts, evils expelled in, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rain, charms to produce, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or drought, games of ball played to produce, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances to obtain, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival to procure, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divinities of the, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; gods of Mexico, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rainy season, expulsion of demons at the beginning of the, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajah of Manipur, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Travancore, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Tanjore, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramsay, Sir W. M., <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ranchi, in Chota Nagpur, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>

<lg>
<l>Rattles to keep out ghosts, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raven legends among the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red thread in popular cure, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and yellow paint on human to represent colours of maize, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reed, W. A., quoted, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinach, Salomon, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renan, Ernest, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renewal, annual, of king's power at Babylon, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection, the divine, in Mexican ritual, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the dead god, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelry at Purim, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revels, Master of the, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhea, wife of Cronus, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodians, their annual sacrifice of a man to Cronus, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhys, Sir John, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ribhus, Vedic genii of the seasons, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice-harvest, carnival at the, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richalm, Abbot, his fear of devils, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Riddles'/>
<l>Riddles asked at certain seasons or on certain occasions, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ride of the Beardless One,</q> a Persian New Year ceremony, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ridgeway, W., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the origin of Greek tragedy, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ridley, Rev. W., quoted, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riedel, J. G. F., quoted, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rig Veda, story of creation in the, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ring suspended in Purim bonfire, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rings, headache transferred to, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritual murder, accusations of, brought against the Jews, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>River of Good Fortune, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers used to sweep away evils, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings and prayers to, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivros, a month of the Gallic calendar, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rockhill, W. W., <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rogations, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman cure for fever, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for epilepsy, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival in honour of ghosts, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; husbandman, his prayers to Mars, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seasons of sowing, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; soldiers, celebration of the Saturnalia by, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans, their mode of reckoning a day, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, the knocking of nails in ancient, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Piazza Navona at, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient, human scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Saturnalia at, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romulus, disappearance of, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roocooyen Indians of French Guiana, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their tug-of-war, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roof, dances on the, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rook, expulsion of devil in island of, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rope, ceremony of sliding down a, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ropes used to keep off demons, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to exclude ghosts, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscher, W. H., on the Salii, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscommon, Twelfth Night in, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosemary, used to beat people with, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rouen, ceremony on Ascension Day at, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roumanians of Transylvania, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowan-tree, cattle beaten with branches of, on May Day, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to keep witches from cows, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rue, fumigation with, as a precaution against witches, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupture, popular cures for, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russia, the Wotyaks of, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russian custom on Palm Sunday, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; villagers, their precautions against epidemics, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Rutuburi</foreign>, a dance of the Tarahumare Indians, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacaea, a Babylonian festival, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to Purim, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Zakmuk, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>celebrated by the Persians, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred dramas, as magical rites, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; harlots, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; slaves, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice, human, successive mitigations of, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Brahmanical theory of, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, human, their influence on cosmogonical theories, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of deified men, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrificial victims, beating people with the skins of, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sagar in India, use of scapegoat at, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahagun, B. de, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Saining,</q> a protection against spirits, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Barbara's Day, custom of putting rods in pickle on, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Dasius, martyrdom of, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Edmund's Day in November, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Eustorgius, church of, at Milan, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. George, Eve of, witches active on the, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. George's Day among the South Slavs, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Guirec, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Hiztibouzit, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>

<lg>
<l>St. John the Baptist, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John (the Evangelist), festival of, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's Day in Abyssinia, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's wort a protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Joseph, feast of, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Nicholas Day, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Paul's, London, the Boy Bishop at <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's, Canterbury, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Day (22nd February), ceremony on, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Pierre d'Entremont in Normandy, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Romain, the shrine of, at Rouen, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Stephen's Day, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of beating young women on, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Sylvester's Day (New Year's Eve), precautions against witches on, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve at Trieste, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Tecla, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Thomas's Eve, witches active on, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saints, cairns near shrines of, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mohammedan, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salii, the dancing priests of Mars, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salisbury, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salt, the goddess of, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -makers worship the goddess of Salt, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dance, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saluting the rising sun, a Syrian custom, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salzburg, the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samon, a month of the Gallic calendar, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sampson, Agnes, a witch, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samsi-Adad, king of Assyria, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samyas monastery near Lhasa, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>San Pellegrino, church of, at Ancona, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sandan'/>
<l>Sandan, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legendary or mythical hero of Western Asia, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandes, the Persian Hercules, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sandan'>Sandan</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santiago Tepehuacan, Indians of, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarawak, the Sea Dyaks of, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardan or Sandan, the burning of, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardanapalus, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>; the epitaph of, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Ashurbanapal, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardes in Lydia, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarn, valley of the, in Salzburg, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarum use, service-books of the, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satan annually expelled by the Wotyaks, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the Cheremiss, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturn, the Roman god of sowing, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his festival the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Golden Age, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man put to death in the character of, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedication of the temple of, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the old Italian god of sowing, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturnalia among the Hos and Mundaris of N. E. India, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and kindred festivals, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Roman, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as celebrated by Roman soldiers, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King of the, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the Carnival, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Lent, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Greece, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Asia, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wide prevalence of festivals like the, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savages, their regulation of the calendar, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxon cure for rupture, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scapegoat, plantain-tree as a, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decked with women's ornaments, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jewish use of, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a material vehicle for the expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scapegoats, immaterial objects as, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animals as, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birds as, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human beings as, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>public, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine animals as, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine men as, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in general, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, human, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in classical antiquity, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Greece, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaten, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stoned, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cast into the sea, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for beating the, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Scaring away the devil</q> at Penzance on the Eve of May Day, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scarlet thread in charm against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schechter, Dr. S., <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scheil, Father, on Elamite inscriptions, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Schmeckostern</foreign> in Germany and Austria, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schönthal, the abbot of, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schönwert, village of Bohemia, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schrader, O., <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schuyler, E., <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwaz, on the Inn, the <q>grass-ringers</q> at, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scorpion's bite, cure for, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotch witch, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, the Highlands of, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure of warts in, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches burnt in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbot of Unreason in, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Highlands'>Highlands</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scourgings, mutual, of South American Indians, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythian kings married the wives of their predecessors, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythians, revellers disguised as, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea, scapegoats cast into the, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Dyaks of Sarawak, their Festival of Departed Spirits, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>

<lg>
<l>Sea-god, sacrifice to, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -slugs, ceremonies at the annual appearance of, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secret Societies in North-Western America, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sedna, Mistress of the Nether World, among the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seed-time, annual expulsion of demons at, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selangor, demons of disease expelled in a ship from, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selemnus, the river, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seler, E., <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seleucia, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semiramis, mythical and historical, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mounds of, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sad fate of her lovers, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt herself on a pyre, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sena-speaking people, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senegambia, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Banmanas of, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senseless Thursday in Carnival, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>September, expulsion of evils by the Incas of Peru in, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpents and lizards supposed to renew their youth by casting their skins, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servians, their precaution against vampyres, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Set, the birth of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sham fight at New Year, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as religious rite, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaman, function of the, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamans, necessity of, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expel demons, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shammuramat and Semiramis, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shampoo, the fatal, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shans of Kengtung, their expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Southern China, their annual expulsion of the fire-spirit, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shawms blown to ban witches, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheepskins, people beaten with, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shepherd beloved by Ishtar, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shetland Islands, Yule in the, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shinto priest, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ship, sicknesses expelled in a, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demons expelled in a, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shogun's palace in Japan, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Shooting the Witches,</q> <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shropshire, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sin-eater in, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires on Twelfth Night in, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shrove Tuesday, the tug-of-war on, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances to promote the growth of the crops on, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siam, the Laosians of, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siamese year of twelve lunar months, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, Ascension Day in, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickness transferred to animals in Europe, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascribed to demons, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicknesses expelled in a ship, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sihanaka, the, of Madagascar, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sikhim, cairns in, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demonolatry in, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silence, compulsory, to deceive demons, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Compare</hi> <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silesia, expulsion of witches on Good Friday in, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against witches in, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Easter Smacks</q> in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of reckoning the Twelve Days in, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silili, a Babylonian goddess, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-eater, the, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-eating in Wales, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singalang Burong, a Dyak war-god, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sins, confession of, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to a buffalo calf, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred vicariously to human beings, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of people transferred to animals, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Delaware Indian remedies for, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirius associated with Ishtar, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Situa, annual festival of the Incas, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siyins, of N. E. India, their belief in demons, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skin disease, supposed remedy for, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mexican remedy for, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skins, creatures that slough their, supposed to renew their youth, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of human victims, worn by men in Mexico, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of sacrificial victims used to beat people, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sky-goddess, the Egyptian, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sladen, Colonel, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave Coast, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women, religious ceremony performed by, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaves, license granted to, at the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>feasted by their masters, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>feasted by their mistresses, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavonia, Good Friday custom in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavonic custom of <q>carrying out Death,</q> <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; peoples, <q>Easter Smacks</q> among the, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; year, the beginning of the, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavs, black god and white god among the, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sleeman, General Sir William, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sloth, the animal, imitated by masker, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sloughing the skin supposed to be a mode of renewing youth, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smallpox, cure for, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to a devil, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled in a proa, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, demon of, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent away in a canoe, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>

<lg>
<l>Smell, foul, used to drive demons away, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W. Robertson, on Semiramis, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smut in wheat, ceremony to prevent, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snails as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snake or lizard in annual ceremony for the riddance of evils, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snipe as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Social ranks, inversion of, at festivals, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates, church historian, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sods, freshly cut, a protection against witches, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soldiers, Roman, celebration of the Saturnalia by, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solomon Islanders, their expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islands, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstice, the winter, ceremony after the, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soma, worship of, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Songs, liturgical, revealed by gods, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and dances, how they originate, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sonnenberg, popular cure for gout in, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soracte, Mount, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorcerers as protectors against demons, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exorcise demons, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Soule</foreign>, a ball contended for in Normandy, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Souls of the dead received once a year by their relations, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South American Indians, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sow as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowing, prayer at, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of demons at, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the god of, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances at, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Saturn the god of, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Italy, season of the spring, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sown fields, fire applied to, on Eve of Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, the Boy Bishop in, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spear, sacred, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spears used to expel demons, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirits, retreat of the army of, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guardian, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>good and evil, personated by children, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Festival of Departed, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spitting as a mode of transferring evil, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a mode of transferring disease, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at ceremony for expulsion of evils, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spittle as a protection against demons, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spring, rites to ensure the revival of life in, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squills used to beat human scapegoats, etc., <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Star, the Morning, personated by a man, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Bethlehem, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steele, Sir Richard, quoted, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sternberg, L., quoted, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sticks, fertilizing virtue attributed to certain, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and stones, evils transferred to, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>piled on the scene of crimes, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Throwing'>Throwing</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stinging young people with ants and wasps, custom of, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone-throwing at Mecca, rite of, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Greece, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stones heaped up near shrines of saints, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>communion by means of, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown at demons, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and sticks, evil transferred to, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>piled on the scene of crimes, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Throwing'>Throwing</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoning, execution by, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Stopfer</foreign>, maskers in Switzerland, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stow, John, on Lords of Misrule, quoted, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strabo, on the Sacaea, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the worship at Zela, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sanctuary at Zela, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strack, H. L., <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stratification of religious beliefs among the Malays, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Straw wrapt round fruit-trees as a protection against evil spirits, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strehlitz, in Silesia, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strudeli and Strätteli, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Substitutes in human sacrifice, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sucla-Tirtha in India, expulsion of sins in, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffering, principle of vicarious, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffolk cure for ague, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suicides, ghosts of, feared, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sukandar river, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumatra, the Battas or Bataks of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun, appeal to the, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm to prevent the sun from setting, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reappearance of, in the Arctic regions, ceremonies at, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of the, at Cuzco, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirit who lives in the, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hearts of human victims offered to the, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mexican story of the creation of the, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Syrian custom of saluting the rising, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, Christmas, an old pagan festival of the, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Egyptian, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunderland, cure for cough in, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Süntevögel</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sunnenvögel</foreign>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superhuman power supposed to be acquired by actors in sacred dramas, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supplementary days of the year, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supreme Being in West Africa, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; God of the Oraons, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Susa, capital of the Elamites, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>

<lg>
<l>Swabia, the <q>Twelve Lot Days</q> in, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swahili, the, of East Africa, their New Year's Day, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swallow dance, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swallows as scapegoats, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweeping misfortune out of house with brooms, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; out the town, annual ceremony of, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swords used to ward off or expel demons, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried by mummers, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aphrodite and Adonis in, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syro-Macedonian calendar, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tagbanuas of the Philippines, their custom of sending spirits of disease away in little ships, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, transference of sins in, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahitians, the, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taigonos Peninsula, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taleins, the, of Burma, their worship of demons, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talmud, the, on Purim, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamanachiers, Indian tribe of the Orinoco, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tamanawas</foreign>, dramatic performances of myths, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamarisk branches used to beat people ceremonially, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tambaran</foreign>, demons, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tammuz'/>
<l>Tammuz, the lover of Ishtar, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual death and resurrection of, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Jerusalem, the weeping for, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Adonis'>Adonis</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Ishtar, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanganyika, Lake, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tangkhuls of Assam, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanjore, Rajah of, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taoism, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tar to keep out ghosts and witches, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -barrels burnt, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarahumares, the, of Mexico, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dances for the crops, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taros, mode of fertilizing, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarsus in Cilicia, Sandan at, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Taupes et Mulots</foreign>, fire ceremony on Eve of Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tavernier, J. B., quoted, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Rev. J. C., quoted, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Rev. R., quoted, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tellemarken in Norway, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telugu remedy for a fever, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temple, Sir Richard C., quoted, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temple, the Inner and the Middle, Lords of Misrule in the, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; church, Lord of Misrule in the, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temporary king, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Siam, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tench as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tenggerese of Java, their sham fight at New Year, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tepehuanes, the, of Mexico, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teshu Lama, the, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Lumbo in Tibet, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teso people of Central Africa, their use of bells to exorcise fiends, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tezcatlipoca, great Mexican god, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young man annually sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thales on spirits, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thargelia, human scapegoats at the festival of the, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thay, the, of Indo-China, their worship of spirits, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theal, G. McCall, on fear of demons, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Theckydaw</foreign>, expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Then</foreign>, spirits, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius and Honorius, decree of, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theory of sacrifice, the Brahmanical, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson Indians of British Columbia, their charms against ghosts, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thorns, wreaths of, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrace, Abdera in, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrashing people to do them good, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Beating'>Beating</ref> <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> <ref target='Index-Whipping'>Whipping</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thread, red, in popular cure, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Three Kings on Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threshold protected against witches by knives, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by sods, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Throwing'/>
<l>Throwing of sticks or stones interpreted as an offering or token of respect, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a mode of riddance of evil, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thule, ceremony in Thule at the annual reappearance of the sun, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thunder, the first peal heard in spring, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demon of, exorcised by bells, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thüringen, expulsion of witches in, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of beating people on Holy Innocents' Day in, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiamat, mythical Babylonian monster, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tibet, demonolatry in, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger-spirits, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tikopia, island of, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timbo in French Guinea, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Time, personification of periods of, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor, the island of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in the spirits of the dead in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Timor fecit deos</foreign>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor-laut Islands, the tug-of-war in the, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demons of sicknesses expelled in a proa from, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>

<lg>
<l>Tinchebray in Normandy, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tjingilli tribe of Central Australia, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tlacaxipeualiztli, Mexican festival, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tlaloc, temple of, in Mexico, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tlemcen in Algeria, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toad as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toboongkoo, the, of Central Celebes, riddles among the, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toci, Mexican goddess, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todas, the, of the Neilgherry Hills, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Togoland, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>; the Hos of, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the negroes of, their remedy for influenza, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tokio, annual expulsion of demons at, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomb of Moses, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonan, Mexican goddess, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonocotes. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Lules'>Lules</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonquin, demon of sickness expelled in, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of demons in, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toothache, cure for, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toradjas, the, of Central Celebes, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their cure by beating, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torches used in the expulsion of demons, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in the expulsion of witches, etc., <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried in procession by maskers, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>applied to fruit-trees on Eve of Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torquemada, J. de, Spanish historian of Mexico, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totec, Mexican god, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personated by a man wearing the skin of a human victim, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totonacs, their worship of the corn-spirit, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tototectin, men clad in skins of human victims, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toxcatl, fifth month of old Mexican year, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mexican festival, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trajan, Pliny's letter to, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transference of evil, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to other people, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to sticks and stones, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to animals, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to men, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Europe, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transformation of animals into men, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, the Roumanians of, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travancore, Rajah of, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demon-worship in, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tree, disease transferred to, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of stick cut from a fruitful, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees, evils transferred to, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trieste, St. Sylvester's Eve at, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinity, the Batta, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; College, Cambridge, Lord of Misrule at, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Trinouxtion</foreign>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tripoli, mode of laying ghosts in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troezenians, their festival resembling the Saturnalia, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trows in Shetland, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumpets blown to expel demons, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blown at the feast of Purim, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Tsuina</foreign>, expulsion of demons in Japan, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tsûl, a Berber tribe, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuaran district of British North Borneo, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tug-of-war as a religious or magical rite, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a charm to produce rain, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tul-ya's e'en in Shetland, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tullus Hostilius, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tumleo, annual fight in, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuna, a spirit, expulsion of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tung ak, a powerful spirit, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turkestan, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ferghana in, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turkish tribes of Central Asia, riddles among the, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turner, L. M., quoted, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuscan Romagna, the, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Twelfth-Day'/>
<l>Twelfth Day, serious significance of, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Three Kings on, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Twelfth Night</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, Eve of, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of witches, etc., on, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Twelfth-Night'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Night, expulsion of the powers of evil on, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances on, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Perchta's Day, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>(Epiphany), the King of the Bean on, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Twelfth-Day'>Twelfth Day</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Night, Eve of, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old Mrs. Perchta on, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonial fires on, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelve Days, weather of the twelve months supposed to be determined by the weather of the, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Macedonia, superstitions as to the, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient India, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accounted a miniature of the year, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Highlands of Scotland, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>difference of opinion as to the date of the, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probably an old intercalary period at midwinter, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Days from Christmas to Twelfth Night (Epiphany), precautions against witches during the, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Days or Twelve Nights not of Christian origin, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires on Eve of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Two-faced mask worn by image of goddess, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Typhon, the birth of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyre and Sidon, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>

<lg>
<l>Tyrol, annual <q>Burning out of the Witches</q> in the, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Perchten</foreign> in the, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Senseless Thursday in the, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uganda Protectorate, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>funeral ceremony in, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n,</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Baganda'>Baganda</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unalashka, one of the Aleutian Islands, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unkareshwar, the goddess of cholera at, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unreason, Abbot of, in Scotland, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Up-helly-a' in Shetland, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urquhart, Sir Thomas, quoted, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Usener, H., <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utch Kurgan, in Turkestan, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vampyres, charms against, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vashti and Esther, temporary queens, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Haman the duplicates of Esther and Mordecai, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vedic times, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for consumption in, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the creed of the, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>riddles in, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Aryans of the, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetation, Mars a deity of, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>out-worn deity of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>processions representing spirits of, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, Easter an old vernal festival of the, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vehicle, expulsion of evils in a material, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vehicles, material, of immaterial things (fear, misfortune, disease, etc.), <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venus and Adonis, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Adonis'>Adonis</ref>, <ref target='Index-Aphrodite'>Aphrodite</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verrall, A. W., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicarious suffering, principle of, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienne, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vieux-Pont, in Orne, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitzilopochtli, great Mexican god, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young man annually sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vohumano or Vohu Manah, a Persian archangel, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voigtland, cure for toothache in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in witchcraft in, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Easter Smacks</q> in, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young people beat each other at Christmas in, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vosges, cure for toothache in the, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, dances on Twelfth Day in the, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Three Kings of Twelfth Day in the, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulsinii in Etruria, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagogo, the, of German East Africa, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walpurgis Night, witches abroad on, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of witches on, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances on, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warramunga tribe of Central Australia, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warts, transference of, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popular cures for, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washamba, the, of German East Africa, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wasps, stinging people with, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wassailing on Eve of Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wax figures in magic, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weapons turned against spiritual foes, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weariness transferred to stones or sticks, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weather of the twelve months determined by the weather of the Twelve Days, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weber, A., on origin of the Twelve Days, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weeks, Rev. John H., quoted, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weights and measures, false, corrected in time of epidemic, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weinhold, K., <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welsh cure for cough, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; custom of sin-eating, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wendland, P., on the crucifixion of Christ, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wends of Saxony, their precautions against witches, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westermarck, Dr. Edward, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalia, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalian form of the expulsion of evil, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whale represented dramatically as a mystery, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Whipping'/>
<l>Whipping people to rid them of ghosts, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whips used in the expulsion of demons and witches, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used by maskers, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White as a colour to repel demons, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and black in relation to human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>figs worn by human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cock, disease transferred to, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; crosses made by the King of the Bean, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; dog, sacrifice of, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as scapegoat, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; god and black god among the Slavs, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Nile, the Dinkas of the, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitsuntide, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whydah, the King of, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widow, bald-headed, in cure, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widows, cleansing of, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wild Huntsman, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willcock, Dr. J., <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William of Wykeham, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, Monier, quoted, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willow used to beat people with at Easter and Christmas, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees in popular remedies, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willow-wood used against witches, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winchester College, Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>

<lg>
<l>Wind, charm to produce a rainy or dry, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnowing-basket beaten at ceremony, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter, ceremony at the end of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances performed only in, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of the expulsion of, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigies of, destroyed, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; solstice, ceremony after the, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch, fire to burn old, on Twelfth Day, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witchcraft in Scotland, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Congo, dread of, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>permanence of the belief in, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Moravia, precautions against, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witches burnt alive, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning out of the, in the Tyrol, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Bohemia, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Silesia and Saxony, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special precautions against, at certain seasons of the year, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annually expelled in Calabria, Silesia, and other parts of Europe, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>active during the Twelve Days from Christmas to Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shooting the, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving out the, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in Scotland, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaten with buckthorn, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rob cows of milk on May Day, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wives of a king taken by his successor, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woman's ornaments, scapegoat decked with, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women impregnated by ghosts, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilized by effigy of a baby, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of fertilizing, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put to death in the character of goddesses in Mexico, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood, King of the, at Aricia, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>World conceived as animated, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>daily created afresh by the self-sacrifice of the deity, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worship of the dead, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>paid to human representatives of gods in Mexico, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wotyaks of Russia, annual expulsion of Satan among the, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wuttke, A., <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xerxes identified with Ahasuerus, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xilonen, Mexican goddess of the Young Maize, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman annually sacrificed in the character of, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xipe, Mexican god, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statuette of, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his festival, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his image, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xixipeme, men clad in skins of human victims, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yabim of German New Guinea, their custom of sending disease away in a small canoe, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yams, ceremonies before eating the new, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Year, burning out the Old, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the old Roman, began in March, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed representatives of the old, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> New Year</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, lunar, of old Roman calendar, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>equated to solar year by intercalation, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, solar, intercalation of the, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man, the, in Japan, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Years named after eponymous magistrates, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the King of the, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yellow the royal colour among the Malays, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yopico, temple in Mexico, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>York, the Boy Bishop at, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yoruba negroes of West Africa, their use of human scapegoats, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Younghusband, Sir Francis, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Youth supposed to be renewed by sloughing of skin, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yucatan, the Mayas of, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yukon River, the Lower, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yules, the, in Shetland, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Yumari</foreign>, a dance of the Tarahumare Indians, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zakmuk or Zagmuk, the Babylonian festival of the New Year, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the Sacaea, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zambesi, the river, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zela in Pontus, Anaitis and the Sacaea at, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Omanos and Anadates at, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus, cake with twelve knobs offered to, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an upstart at Olympia, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the Babylonian Bel, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Laphystian, associated with human sacrifices, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Lycaean, human sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Olympian, his temple at Athens, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Pelorian, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmern, H., <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoganes, a mock king at Babylon, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoroaster, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zündel, G., on demonolatry in West Africa, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zuni sacrifice of turtle, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
